A Compliant Assurance Model for Assessing the 

Trustworthiness of Cloud-based E-Commerce 

Systems  

Thembekile O. Mayayise 

Isaac O. Osunmakinde  

School of Computing, College of Science, Engineering 

School of Computing, College of Science, Engineering 

and Technology, University of South Africa 

and Technology, University of South Africa 

Pretoria, South Africa 
Tmayayise@gmail.com 

trust 

cloud-based 

in  a  volatile 

Abstract— Many  cloud-based  e-commerce  stores  aim  to  attract 
and  retain  customers  in  order  to  be  competitive.  However,  they 
are all faced with a challenge regarding gaining and maintaining 
consumer 
e-commerce 
environment  where  risks  pertaining  to  information  security, 
privacy of information and inadequate monitoring of compliance 
to applicable laws are prevalent. The pervasiveness of these risks 
has  indirectly  propelled  the  development  of  web  assurance 
models,  which  were  designed  in  an  attempt  to  encourage  online 
consumer  trust.  Regrettably,  many  of  these  models  have  been 
inadequate  in  certain  areas,  such  as  being  unable  to  provide 
online  real-time  assurance  on  a  comprehensive set  of  attributes, 
which  include  a  check  of  compliance  to  the  applicable  e-
commerce legislation or standards in a cloud-based environment. 
The  aim  of  this  research  was  to  examine  whether  the 
integration of the attributes of adaptive legislation, adaptive ISO 
standards,  policies,  advanced  user  security  and  website 
availability can be used to develop a compliant assurance model. 
The  model  uses  an  intelligent  cooperative  rating  based  on  the 
analytical  hierarchy  process  and  page  ranking  techniques  to 
improve  the  level  of  cloud-based  trustworthiness.  We  illustrated 
in  an  empirical  explanatory  survey  conducted  with  15  test 
samples  from  IEEE,  Science  Direct  databases  and  real  life  data 
captured  from  E-commerce  sites  that  the  proposed  compliant 
model  strongly  contributes  to  the  improvement  of  cloud-based 
sites,  as  well  as  enhancing  the  trustworthiness  of  these  websites. 
The  findings  of  this  research  study  can  be  used  as  a  reference 
guide to understand the effectiveness of cloud-based e-commerce 
assurance  models,  as  well  as  to  enhance  the  trustworthiness  of 
these models. 

Pretoria, South Africa 
 osunmio@unisa.ac.za 

 

with numerous challenges, which if not addressed, could hinder 
the adoption of e-commerce; these relate to information security 
and privacy risks and other general website-related attacks. 
 
The advent of  cloud computing in the late 1990s has made 
it  possible  for  online  businesses  such  as  Amazon  to  provide 
cloud-based  services,  which  include  storage  services,  among 
others  [7].  Cloud  computing  is  an  emerging  technology  that 
offers a range of technology services, such software as a service, 
as depicted in figure I. According to [22], cloud  computing can 
be  defined  as  well-packaged  services  that  satisfy  the  following 
conditions:  the  services  offered  through  the  cloud  must  be 
delivered  through  the  telecommunications  network;  users  are 
dependent  on  the  service  to  gain  access  and  process  data;  the 
user  retains  the  legal  control  over  the  data;  some  of  the 
resources  on  which  the  cloud  service  depends  are  virtualised, 
implying  that  a  user  may  not  necessarily  know  the  physical 
location  of  the  hosting  device,  and  lastly  in  a  cloud  there  is  a 
flexible contractual agreement  between the service provider and 
client with regard to the quantum used. 
 

 

Keywords—  cloud,  assurance,  model,  seal,  trustworthiness,  e-

commerce . 

I. 

 INTRODUCTION  

The internet has revolutionized the way in which companies do 
business or render services to customers  globally.  However the 
issue  of  trust  over  the  internet  between  buyers  and  sellers 
remains  paramount,  since  it  determines  the  success  of  the 
adoption of e-commerce.  The internet as a business enabler has 
numerous  advantages,  such  as  providing  businesses  with  a 
technological platform to conduct business without experiencing 
any  geographical  boundaries.  On  the  other  hand,  business 
organizations  that  conduct  business  over  the  internet  are  faced 

Figure I. Cloud computing services (adapted from [6]) 

 

 
 
Cloud  computing  has  many  potential  benefits,  such  as 
taking  away  the  responsibility  of  managing  the  technology 
infrastructure,  allowing  business  owners  to  focus  on  their  core 
business. On the other hand, there are some risks that the cloud 
service  providers  need  to  address  in  order  to  minimize  data 
breaches  in  the  cloud.  According  to  [17],  many  cloud  service 
providers  claim  to  have  high  systems  availability  capabilities, 

yet fail to produce the evidence to support the claim. As a result, 
customers  are  likely  to  experience  service  disruption  or  even 
data losses or theft, as depicted in the case of Google in Table I 
(adapted  from  [18]  and  [25]).  It  is  thus  imperative  for  trust 
relationships between parties doing business via the internet as a 
channel of communication to be strong. 
 
Table  I:  Specific  e-commerce  losses  as  a  result  of  online 
transactions 
 

 

 

 

 

 

Date  Country  Company  Cause 
Feb 
2010  Global 

VeriSign 

The systems were hacked  

Apr 
2011  Global 

Sony 

Jul 
2011 

Jul 
2011 

China 

Alibaba 

South 
Korea 

ESTsoft 

Oct 
2012  Global 

 

Google  

 

Security and privacy breach 
Inadequate gold supplier 
verification measures where 
goods that customers ordered 
were never received 

Information system security 
breach by hackers 
Cloud service outages that 
resulted in slow responses and 
server unavailability, which 
affected various other vendor 
websites 

is 

[4].  Another  challenge 

E-commerce  assurance  models,  such  as  policy  statements 
on an online vendor’s site or a third party assurance seal, have 
been  devised  in  an  attempt  to  promote  online  consumer  trust. 
Unfortunately,  there  are  some  short-comings  that  need  to  be 
addressed  by  future  web  seal  designers.  One  of 
the 
shortcomings is that assurance models do not seem to provide 
the  desired  assurance,  but  only  perceived  assurance,  to 
consumers 
that  e-commerce 
assurance  models  are  static  and  do  not  provide  continuous 
compliance assessments to applicable legislation and standards 
by  online  vendors  or  cloud  service  providers.  In  an 
environment where the changes to the technology platform and 
configuration  may  be  frequent,  such  as  the  cloud,  continuous 
assurance  would  be  more  beneficial  [15].The  cloud  has 
numerous  challenges,  such  as  failure  to disclose how  the  data 
collected via the cloud will be used and continuous availability 
of the cloud resources [14]. A cloud assurance model should be 
designed  in  such  a  way  that  these  challenges  are  addressed in 
order to encourage online consumer trust. The objective of this 
paper is to present a comprehensive survey of a cloud-based e-
commerce assurance model and to propose a compliant cloud-
based  assurance  model 
for  e-commerce.  The  major 
contributions of this paper are as follows: 

  Development  of  a  compliant  cloud-based  assurance 
rating 
[AHP]  and  page 

model  based  on  cooperative 
(analytical  hierarchy  process 
ranking) for e-commerce trustworthiness 

intelligent 

Impact 

Undisclosed information was stolen 
An  estimated  77  million  play  station  accounts  were 
hacked and confidential information such as credit card 
information was exposed 

This resulted in  financial losses estimated at $1.94 
million 

35 million people's personal information was exposed 

Loss of productivity as a result of slow response of 
systems 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  Knowledge  generation  as  a 

to 
understand e-commerce trustworthiness in general and 
cloud-based  e-commerce 
in 
particular detail. 

assurance  models 

reference  guide 

This paper is arranged as follows: section  II discusses the 
cloud-based  assurance  models,  section  III  proposes  the 
compliant  cloud-based  assurance  model,  section  IV, 
descriptive  deployment  analysis,  lastly  the  conclusion  is 
presented in section V. 

II.  CLOUD-BASED ASSURANCE MODELS AND 

ASSOCIATED CHALLENGES  

A.  Cloud-based e-commerce assurance models 

Cloud-based assurance models are in the form of certifications 
or  manual  compliance  checks  achieved  by  the  cloud  service 
provider to numerous standards and even laws such as privacy 
laws.  Reference  [1]  is  an  example  of  a  cloud service  provider 
that  provides  its  customers  with  an  assurance  model  that  lists 
the type of certification received by the service provider, such 
as  International  Organization  for Standardization  (ISO)  27001 
and  Payment  Card  Industry  certification.  The  declaration  of 
certification  by  [1]’s  web  services 
is  aimed  at 
encouraging  trust  among  its  clients  or  merchants  to  use  its 
technology  platform.  In  a  nutshell,  the  main  objective  of 
assurance  models  is  to  reduce  fear  to  transact  among 

team 

consumers  and  rather  encourage  online  customers  to  trust  the 
process. Sections 1 to 3 discuss the different types of assurance 
models 
in  cloud-based  e-commerce 
environments. 

that  can  be  found 

 

1)  Cloud-based policy assurance models  

The  policy  assurance  models  are  provided  as  self-assurance 
measures in a cloud-based environment by the online vendor or 
the  cloud  service  provider.    Policy  statements  are  normally 
displayed at the bottom of the  website home page, hyperlinked 
to the policy detail. The advantage of  a policy assurance  model 
is  that  it  is  a  common  form  of  e-commerce  assurance.  The 
disadvantage  is  that  in  a  cloud-based  e-commerce  environment 
policy  assurances  may  not  entail  all  the  information  pertaining 
to the applicable privacy laws [22] and this is an area that needs 
to  be  improved.    Examples  of  policy  assurance  models  can  be 
found in [1] and [5]. 

 Static cloud-based assurance models 

2) 
A  static  assurance  is  a  seal  that  is  displayed  on  a  certified 
cloud  service  provider’s  site;  it  requires  a  user  to  click  on  the 
website  to  read  the  detail.  The  Trusted  Cloud  Data  security 
certification is an example of a cloud-based assurance model for 
service  providers  within  the  European  Union  domain,  where 
both the company and the service provider  are regulated by the 
European Union Safe harbor principles  [23]. While this type of 
assurance  model  can  be  useful  in  providing  assurance  to 
countries  that  are  EU-resident,  it  eliminates  non-EU  countries 
because  it  is  not  adaptive  to  accommodate  the  laws  of  other 
countries.  The  disadvantage  of  this  type  of  seal  is  failure  to 
provide  continuous  assurance  in  a  dynamic  cloud-based  e-
commerce environment. 

information  concerning 

3)  Continuous assurance models 
A  continuous  or  variable  seal  assurance  model  provides 
regular  online  updates  on 
the 
assurance  status  of  a  particular  website.  An  example  of  a 
cloud-based  assurance  model  is  the  [14]  web  seal.  This  has 
been  designed  to  provide  security  assurance  in  the  cloud 
environment  where  it  scans  the  website  for  any  known 
vulnerabilities. The advantage of this model is that it provides 
online real time assurance. What needs to  be done to improve 
these seals is to factor in compliance to best practice standards 
and  regulatory  laws  for  the  users  to  trust  the  system,  since 
providing assurance on known  vulnerabilities may not always 
be sufficient.  

B.  Challenges of Current Assurance Models  

the  cloud-based  computing  environment, 

    In 
there  are 
numerous  challenges,  which  must  be  addressed  in  order  to 
encourage online consumer trust. One of the ways in which these 
challenges  can  be  addressed  is  by  providing  e-commerce 
assurance,  which  will  encourage  online  consumer 
trust. 
Reference  [22]  has  identified  some  of  the  key  assurance 
challenges  in  the  cloud  environment  and  these  are  discussed  in 
sections 1 to 4 below. 

1)  Risk of unauthorized use of personal information as an 

assurance challenge 

The  cloud  presents  a  challenge  to  customers    regarding 
privacy  of  their  information.  particularly  on  how  the  data  that 
customers  divulge  will  be  used  or  stored  by  the  cloud  service 
provider. In the event of a data privacy breach, it often becomes 
very  difficult  to  ascertain  which  laws  are  applicable,  more 
especially  if  it  was  not  specified  at  the  time  of  concluding  the 
agreement  between  the  online  vendor  and  the  cloud  service 
provider  [9].  In  order  to  address  this  challenge,  the  proposed 
cloud-based  assurance  model  assesses  adaptive  laws  on  which 
the vendor and the cloud service provider agree to be applicable 
in the event of a breach. 

2)  Security of the data as an assurance challenge  
Information  security  in  the  cloud  is  paramount.  When  a 
security breach occurs, the impact of that breach is huge, since it 
is likely to affect  more than one  website affiliated to that cloud 
service  provider.  Amazon  is  an  example  of  a  cloud  service 
provider  that  prides  itself  on  its  ability  to  provide  a  secure 
website  environment  for  business  purposes.  However  that  does 
not mean that every website that is affiliated to Amazon will be 
protected by a standard seal program.  To illustrate this fact, we 
examined  the  assurance  status  of    the  different  websites 
affiliated  to  Amazon,    such  as  [3],  which  has  two  assurance 
seals, i.e. Norton Secured and Bizrate, whereas [19] has no seal 
displayed,  notwithstanding  the  different  business  types.  The 
proposed  model  would  assist  in  ensuring  that the  cloud  service 
providers  provide  standard  assurance  levels  for  areas  such  as 
information  security  and  compliance  with  specific  laws  and 
security standards. 

3)  Availability of cloud services as an assurance challenge 
Many online vendors who are using cloud services rely on 
the  service  provider  to  keep  the  e-commerce  environment 
available.  The  impact  of  system  unavailability  in  the  cloud 
environment is serious, since it affects  more than one  vendor, 
as  in  the  case  of  Google,  where  its  cloud  services  became 
unavailable and  multiple  vendors  were affected  [25].  In order 
to  create  a  trustworthy  environment,  users  need  to  be  aware 
that the website they are transacting from is a true vendor site 
which  can  be  accessible  on  demand.  The  proposed  cloud-
based  e-commerce  assurance  model  checks 
the  cloud 
environment  servers,  reports  on  the  availability  status  and 
provides an aggregated rating,  which takes into account other 
website attributes. A site that is constantly available will yield 
a positive rating, marked with a green status on the website. 

4)  Descriptive survey on laxities of assurance models 

This section discusses the weaknesses of some of the existing e-
commerce  assurance  models  and  how  they  are  perceived  in 
terms  of  trustworthiness.  Figures  II  (a)  and  (b)  provide  a 
summary of the findings of the research that was conducted by 
[8].  The  research  was  conducted  to  determine  whether  seal-
accredited  websites  were  more  trustworthy  than  unaccredited 
sites. A tool was used to check for policy compliance issues on 
the  certified  websites.  The  findings  revealed  that  on  the 
accredited  websites,  4%  of  the  sites  were  not  trustworthy 
because  of  failure  to  meet  certain  requirements  as  expected  by 
the seal accreditation bodies. The findings revealed that  for the 
Truste  accreditation  [24]  and  the  BBB  online  seal,  not  all  the 
websites displaying the seals were in actual fact trustworthy.  

This  finding  raises  some  doubt  in  terms  of  the  credibility  of 
seal accreditation bodies because  when an analysis was done of 
uncertified sites, only 3% of the sites were found untrustworthy, 
which  is  less  than  4%  of  the  certified  sites  that  were  found 
untrustworthy  (refer  to  figure  II  (a)  and  (b).  The  challenge 

presented  by  these  findings  is  that  it  raises  the  possibility  that 
some untrustworthy sites are posing as trustworthy sites because 
they display web seals.   

 

Figure II. Do existing e-commerce assurance models require improved trustworthiness? 

 

   

These  results  highlight  a  need  for  more  work  to  enhance  the 
existing  e-commerce  assurance  models,  including  the  cloud-
based e-commerce assurance models. 

III.  PROPOSED COMPLIANT CLOUD-BASED 

ASSURANCE MODEL 

The proposed model consists of the following assurance measures:  
adaptive legislation, adaptive ISO standards, policies and advanced 
security login and website availability. The term “adaptive” is used 
show that the attribute is not fixed but rather flexible in such a way 
that it accommodates revised legislation or different legislation, 
provided it is specific to the e-commerce environment. Figure III 
presents the proposed cooperative assurance rating model based on 
page ranking and AHP techniques. 

The mathematical model deals with the level of e-commerce 

assurance based on PageRank modelling by [20] as an e-commerce 
assurance rating (EAR).   

Our EAR model is shown in equation (1). 

EAR (A) = (1-d) + 

 (1)    

Where  t1,  .  .  .  ,  tn  are  websites  linking  to  website  A,  C    is  the 
number of outgoing links from a  website (out degree) and d is a 
damping  factor,  usually  set  to  0.85  this  value  avoids  accidental 
infinite  series  of  websites  linking  infinite  number  of  other  sites. 
Since PageRank assigns a high score to a node, if it is pointed by 
highly ranked nodes, it is highly applicable in advancing website 
trustworthiness based on e-commerce assurance. The AHP [12] is 
a  technique  that  is  used  in  environments  where  complex 
decisions need to be made. For the purpose of this study AHP is 
used to reach clear decisions on the state of every attribute of the 

proposed assurance model. AHP is used to impart some structure 
to  the  unstructured  assurance  model  attributes,  such  as  policy, 
legislation and the ISO standard [21] and package these attributes 
in  a  manner  that  makes  it  feasible  to  make  a  decision  on  the 
website’s  overall  state  of  trustworthiness.  The  technique  firstly 
aims to classify the attributes into distinct groups with the aim of 
constructing a hierarchy of attributes where the lower hierarchy is 
limited  by  the  upper  one  specifically;  pairwise  comparison 
matrices  are  generated  with  respect  to  our  attributes  for  first 
rating.  One  of  the  important  decision  steps  in  AHP  is  shown  in 
equation (2). 

                       (2) 

Where Z=comparison matrix. The basic principle of our method 
is cooperative usage or parallel activation of the AHP and page 
ranking techniques in order to use the strength of the second to 
the  benefit  of  the  first.  This  provides  an  accurate  rating  and 
instils 
in  cloud-based  e-commerce 
environments.  The  cooperative  assurance  rating  status  is  as 
follows:  green  is  for  a  trustworthy  site,  yellow  denotes  a  risky 
site  and  red  a  completely  untrustworthy  site;  these  indications 
guide the customer in transacting from a site or not doing it. 

in  customers 

trust 

A) Uncertified websitesB) Certified websitesC) Attacks due to laxity on e-commerce assurance models))()((........))()((11tntnttcEARcEARdnnnnijzzzzzZ....:....:1111AHP                                                                                            Page Ranking 

 
Figure III: Cooperative intelligent rating model for cloud-based e-commerce assurance 

 
The  proposed  model  is  aimed  at  providing  useful  information 
for  decision-making  to  a  customer  concerning  the  website’s 
trustworthiness.  In  order  to  transact  from  a  website,  the  proposed 
model  (as  shown  in  figure  III)  requires  the  creation  of  strong 
online  login  credentials.  Thereafter,  a  customer  provides  input 
through  a  short  survey,  to  determine  if  the  customer  has  read  the 
policies displayed and secondly if the  customer has  experienced a 
bad or good shopping encounter through the website in the past or 
not.  The  model  aggregates  the  user’s  input  together  with  the 
following attributes: policies, legislation, ISO standard and website 
availability. The model checks the presence of the policies and the 
last policy review date to determine currency and provide a rating. 
Furthermore, 
to  Electronic 
Communications  and  Transactions  (ECT)  legislation  will  be 
conducted to produce overall  website rating.  Adoption of the  ISO 
standard,  specifically  the  ISO  27001,  will  be  confirmed  by  the 
model  on 
transactions,  specifically 
encryption.  An  online  check  to  determine  if  the  website  is 
consistently  available  and  has  the  latest  anti-virus  software  and 
latest patch is conducted to ensure that it is not vulnerable to online 
attacks. The model combines all the attribute information using the 
cooperative  rating  based  on  AHP  and  page  ranking  to  strengthen 
the  assurance  level.  A  trustworthy  site  flashes  green  and  an 
untrustworthy  one  flashes  red.  The  proposed  model’s  benefits  are 
as follows: 

the  security  of  online 

compliance 

a 

check 

for 

a) It  is  comprehensive  and  interactive  in  that  it  assesses 
compliance  to  legislation  and  also  does  online 
checking  of  technological  compliance  in  terms  of 

checking  for  the  latest  anti-virus  software  and 
website availability. 

b) It is interactive and visible through the colour display 

on the website. 

c) A dashboard (green, yellow, red) is provided as a result 

of a cooperative rating, which strengthens the 
assurance level. 

The detailed discussions of the model attributes are presented in 
sections A to E. One can see that the proposed model has  more 
beneficial  enhancements  than  the  existing  ones  such  as  the 
trusted cloud data security certification and the KYPLEX model 
[14] 

A.  Adaptive legislation as assurance measures 

In the trans-border  cloud environment the application of laws 
gets very complex in the event of a privacy or security breach if 
the applicable laws have not been specified from the onset [11]. 
In  terms  of  providing  e-commerce  assurance,  laws  have  been 
found  to  be  an  assurance  measure  [13].  Different  e-commerce 
laws  that  are  specific  can  be  used  with  the  model.  For  the 
purposes of this study, South African legislation [9] will be used 
because  of  its  specific  provisions  in  terms  of  e-commerce 
environments. The ECT Act provisions will be used as measures 
for aggregation in the e-commerce environment, where the final 
rating  will  alert  the  customer  if  the  website  that  is  hosted  in  a 
cloud environment is safe to transact from or not. A testable null 
directional correctional hypothesis that is set for this attribute is:  

H :  The  level  of  adaptive  legislation  of  a  country  is  not 

positively associated with other assurance measures 

10 
In testing this proposition, explanatory research is required, as 
shown in table IV. 

  B. Adaptive ISO security standard as an assurance measure 

standard 

international 

benchmarking 

According to [10], the  ISO 27002 standard is regarded as the 
e-commerce 
for 
information security,  which is thus suitable for inclusion  in the 
cloud-based  environment.  As  a  result,  sections  10.9.1  to  10.9.3 
of  ISO  27001  have  been  identified  as  vital  for  inclusion  in  the 
proposed  model.  The  model  checks  for  the  security  of 
transactions  in  an  online  environment  by  checking  for  the 
encryption  of  transactions  on  the  website.  This  check,  together 
with  the  other  attributes,  will  be  assessed  and  aggregated  in 
order to show the final website assurance rating. A testable null 
directional correctional hypothesis that is set for this attribute is:  

 

H :  The  level  of  adaptive  ISO  standards  and  other  assurance 

measures is negatively associated 
 

In testing this proposition, explanatory research is required, as 

shown in table IV. 

C. Policies as an assurance measure 

Policies  have  often  been  used  by  various  websites  to  provide 
assurance  to  prospective  customers  concerning  privacy  of 
information  and  other  related  practices.  In  terms  of  the  South 
African  ECT  Act,  certain  policies  are  required  by  law  to  be 
displayed  on  vendor  websites.  These  include  policies  such  as 
privacy  and  refund  policies,  which  must  appear  on  the  online 
vendor’s site. Policies in a cloud environment are critical so that 
consumers  can  know  and  understand  how  their  personal 
information  will  be  handled  in  terms  of  privacy  and  to  know 
which  laws  will  apply  in  the  event  of  a  breach.  Specifying  the 
laws applicable to policy statements will be an improvement on 
existing  policy  models.  A  testable  null  directional  causal 
hypothesis that is set for this attribute is:  

H :  The  level  of  policies  of  a  business  enterprise  does  not 

positively influence other assurance measures. 
In testing this proposition, explanatory research is required, as 
shown in table IV. 

D. Advanced security features as an assurance measure 

security 

in 

a 

Information 

cloud-based 

e-commerce 
environment  is  crucial  in  order  to  gain  and  maintain  online 
customer trust. Cloud service providers need to provide leading 
edge security  and auditing capabilities to keep up with  meeting 
the  customer’s  assurance  needs.  Customers  need  to  feel  secure 
from  the  login  phase  to  check  out.  A  testable  null  directional 
causal hypothesis that is set for this attribute is:  

 

H : The level of strength of advanced user security does not 

influence other assurance measures 
 
In testing this proposition, explanatory research is required, as 

shown in table IV. 

E. Site availability as an assurance measure 

Website availability is crucial in the cloud-based environment. 
Service  disruptions  ought  to  be  minimal  for  customers  to  gain 
and  maintain  trust  in  an  online  vendor  store.  A  testable  null 
directional correctional hypothesis that is set for this attribute is:  

H :  The  level  of  e-commerce  site  availability  and  other 

assurance measures is negatively associated 
In testing this proposition, explanatory research is required, as 
shown in table IV. 

IV.  DESCRIPTIVE AND DEPLOYMENT ANALYSIS 

A.  Descriptive analysis and results 

  Table  IV  contains  statistical  data,  which  were  arrived  at  by 
conducting a survey of journals from the IEEE, Science Direct 
databases  based  on  the  criteria  of  whether  they  were  an  E-
commerce  transacting  site  or  not.  The  survey  was  conducted 
to determine if the  following attributes had been identified as 
assurance  measures  in  any  of  the  sampled  journals  and  e-
commerce  websites:  adaptive 
ISO 
standards,  policy,  availability  and  advanced  security  logon. 
The  sampling  frame  is  October  2012  to  March  2013  and  the 
journals were sampled based on their relevance to the subject 
of  this  article  where  specific  keywords  were  used.  The  main 
aim  was  to  determine  the  number  of  articles  in  support  of  or 
against the proposed attributes as assurance measures. 

legislation,  adaptive 

 

Table IV Sampled dataset from journal articles and real life data from e-commerce sites

20304050Keys:db1=IEEE database,db2=Science direct database,wrt=with 
respect to,Y=Yes,UND=Undecided. 

The  Pearson’s  correlation  coefficient  (R)  in  [16]  was 
implemented and confirmed  with excel  macro to compute the 
relationships  in  Table  IV.  Any  two  attributes  are  chosen  at 
random to test for possible relationships as shown below: 
  

1)  H1: The level of adaptive legislation of a country is not 

positively associated with other assurance measures 

 

FINDINGS: The result of the macro implemented implies:  
Corr(Legislation: ISO) = 0.2;                                   
DECISION: Since the correlation result> 0,Corr (Legislation: 
ISO)  =  0.2;  The  above  proposition  is  rejected,  which  implies 
that the level of adaptive legislation of a country is positively 
associated with any other assurance measure 

2)  H2:  The  level  of  adaptive  ISO  standards  and  other 

assurance measures is negatively associated 

 

FINDINGS:  The  result  of  the  macro  implemented  implies: 
Corr(ISO: Availability) = 0.1769;  
DECISION:  Since  the  correlation  result  >  0,  the  above 
proposition is rejected, which implies that the level of adaptive 
ISO  standards  and  other  assurance  measures  is  positively 
associated. 

3)  H3: The level of policy of a business enterprise does not 

positively influence other assurance measures 

 

FINDINGS:  The  result  of  the  macro  implemented  implies: 
Corr(Policies: Availability) = 0.12; 
DECISION:  Since  the  correlation  result  >  0  suggests  the 
rejection of the above proposition. This implies that the level 
of  policy  of  a  business  enterprise  does  positively  influence 
other assurance measures. 

4)  H4:  The  level  of  strength  of  advanced  user  security 

does not influence other assurance  measures 
 
FINDINGS:  The  result  of  the  macro  implemented  implies: 
Corr(Security : Availability) = 0.0353;  
DECISION:  Since  the  correlation  result  >  0  suggests  the 
rejection of the above proposition. This suffices  to prove that 
the level of strength of advanced user security does influence 
other  assurance  measures.  The  correlational  graph 
that 
emerged  from  these  direct  or  indirect  interrelationships  is 
shown in figure IV (a). 

Figure  IV(a):  Emerged  correlational  graph  of  the  assurance 
measures 

 

The results above suggest necessary or supporting conditions 
to say that the assurance measures could serve as the building 

blocks of the intelligent model in figure  III  and are compliant 
for  accessing  the  trustworthiness  of  cloud-based  e-commerce 
sites. 
 

B.  Deployment scenario of the cloud-based assurance 

model 

1)  Scenario 1 –Untrustworthy e-commerce website 

As shown in figure IV (b) Joyce is considering making a book 
purchase through a cloud-based e-commerce  website. She has 
created  an  online  account.  Following  logging  in,  Joyce  is 
asked through a short survey whether she has seen the policies 
(privacy  and  refund)  on  the  website  and  she  responds 
positively.  Joyce  had  no  previous  shopping  experience 
through  the  website  and  the  system  does  not  ask  questions 
concerning  her  last  shopping  experience.  Unfortunately,  soon 
thereafter, a red button starts flashing at the bottom right-hand 
corner  of  the  screen,  signalling  to  her  that  the  website  is 
untrustworthy. Joyce clicks to read more information and it is 
highlighted  that  the  website  has  been  unavailable  for  an 
extended period of time and is not compliant with cloud-based 
e-commerce  legislation.  As  a  result,  Joyce  abandons  the  sale 
and  signs  out  because  the  website  is  not  trustworthy.  In  a 
nutshell the model interacts with Joyce through a short survey 
on  the  attributes  whilst  the  model  simultaneously  carries  out 
background  checks  on  the  site  based  on  the  assurance 
attributes to come up with an overall website rating. 

 

The proposed model could be used to address this scenario. 
 

  Figure IV (b). Red website rating 

V.  CONCLUSION 

E-commerce assurance is an area that has not been thoroughly 
researched, more especially cloud-based e-commerce assurance. 
As  a result,  very few journals discuss cloud-based e-commerce 
assurance  models  and  propose  robust  models.  In  this  research 
work,  the  focus  was  on  examining  the  existing  e-commerce 
assurance  models  and  placing  particular  focus  on  cloud-based 
assurance  with the aim of identifying gaps and addressing them 
by  proposing  a  cloud-based  e-commerce  assurance  model.  The 
proposed cloud-based assurance model consists of the following 
assurance  attributes:  policy,  adaptive  legislation,  adaptive  ISO 
standards and advanced user security login.  The  AHP and page 
ranking  techniques  are  used  to  achieve  cooperative  ranking  of 
the  attributes,  which  is  displayed  on  the  website  for  customer 
guidance  regarding  the  website’s  trustworthiness,  as  shown  in 
figure  IV(b).The  major  improvement  in  the  proposed  model  is 
to  have  an  intelligent  cloud-based  assurance  rating,  which  the 
existing  e-commerce  assurance  models  do  not  have.  The 
proposed cloud-based e-commerce assurance model can be used 
by  online  customers,  vendors,  cloud  service  providers  and  also 
law enforcers.  

[1] 

[2]  

[3] 

[4] 

[5] 

[6] 

[7]  

[8] 

[9] 

REFERENCES 

Amazon. (2012). E-commerce applications. 
Retrieved from http://aws.amazon.com/ecommerce-
applications/ 
Better Business Bureau. (2012) BBB accredited 
business seal for the web. Retrieved from 
http://www.bbb.org/us/bbb-online-business/ 
Bookwork. (2013).Home. 
http://www.bookworm.com/. 
Boulianne, E., & Cho ,C. H.(2009).The rise and fall 
of WebTrust, International Journal of Accounting 
Information Systems, 10(4), 229-244. 
Business Report. (2012). News in brief. Retrieved 
from http://www.iol.co.za/business/business-
news/news-in-brief-1.1213090?showComments=true 
 Cloud computing. (2013). Wikipedia. Retrieved 
from http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cloud_computing 
Computer Weekly (2013). A history of cloud 
computing. Retrieved from 
http://www.computerweekly.com/feature/A-history-
of-cloud-computing 
 Edelman, B. (2011). Adverse Selection in online 
"trust" certifications and search results. Electronic 
Commerce Research and Applications, 10 (1), 17-25  
 Electronic Communications and Transactions Act, 
(2002), s.43.1. (SA.). 

[10]   Gerber, M. & Von Solms, R. (2008) Information 

security requirements – Interpreting the legal aspects, 
Computers and Security, 27(6), 124-135. 

[11]   Gray, A. (2013). Conflict of the laws and the cloud. 

Computer law and security review, 29, 58-65. 
[12]   Goh, H.H., & Kok,B.C.(2010). Application of 

Analytic Hierarchy Process (AHP) in load shedding 
scheme for electrical power system. Environment and 
Electrical Engineering (EEEIC), 2010 9th 
International Conference(pp.225-235).Retrieved from 
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/xpl/login.jsp?tp=&arnumbe
r=5489942&url=http%3A%2F%2Fieeexplore.ieee.or
g%2Fxpls%2Fabs_all.jsp%3Farnumber%3D5489942 
Hosein, I & Whitely, E. (2002).The regulation of 
electronic commerce: learning from the UK’s RIP 
act. Strategic Information Systems, 11(1), 31-58. 
KYPLEX.(2013). Keep your website clean from 
malware. Retrieved from 

[13] 

[14] 

 

http://www.kyplex.com/security-
seal.html#domain=http://www.kyplex.com/ 

[15]  Mauldin, E.G, Nicolaou, A.I., & Kovar, S.E. (2005). 

The influence of scope and timing of reliability 
assurance in B2B e-commerce, International Journal 
of Accounting Information Systems, 7(2), 115-129 
Neto, A.M, Rittner, L., Leite, N., Zampieri, D. E, 
Lotufo, R & Mendeleck, A. (2007). Pearson's 
Correlation Coefficient for Discarding Redundant 
Information in Real Time Autonomous Navigation 
System. 16th IEEE International Conference on 
Control Applications.p.426-431 
Network world. (2013.) News. Retrieved from 
http://www.networkworld.com/news/2012/111412-
gartner-cloud-security-264268.html 
PC advisor. (2013).The 15 worst data security 
breaches of the 21st century. Retrieved from 
http://www.pcadvisor.co.uk/news/security/3338236/1
5-worst-data-security-breaches-of-21st-century/ 
Shop Bop. (2012).Shop Bop home. Retrieved from 
http://www.shopbop.com/ 
Sidiropoulos, A & Manolopoulos, Y. (2006) 
Generalized comparison of graph-based ranking 
algorithms for publications and authors, The Journal 
of Systems and Software, 79, 1679-1700. 
South  African  National  Standard,  (2005),  Security 
techniques - Code of practice for information security 
management,  ISO 27001: International Organization 
for standardization, Switzerland 
Svantesson,  D  &  Clarke,  R.  (2010).  Privacy  and 
consumer  risks  in  cloud  computing.  Computer  Law 
and Security Review, 26, 391-397. 
Trusted Cloud. (2013) Cloud Privacy Certification. 
Retrieved from http://www.truste.com/products-and-
services/enterprise-privacy/TRUSTed-cloud 
Trusted  websites.  (2012).  Web  site  privacy  services. 
Retrieved  from  http://www.truste.com/products-and-
services/enterprise-privacy/TRUSTed-websites 
Yahoo Finance. (2013). Google's cloud goes down 
affecting lots of websites. Retrieved from 
http://in.finance.yahoo.com/news/googles-cloud-
goes-down-affecting-173151695.html 

[16] 

[17] 

[18] 

[19] 

[20] 

[21] 

[22] 

[23] 

[24] 

[25] 

 

