A Sample of Digital Forensic Quality Assurance in 

the South African Criminal Justice System 

 

Jason Jordaan: CFCE, CFE, PMCSSA, ACE 

MTech, BComHons, BSc, BTech 

Special Investigating Unit, Cyber Forensic Laboratory 

Security and Networks Research Group, Department of Computer Science, Rhodes University 

East London, South Africa 

Grahamstown, South Africa 

jjordaan@siu.org.za 

 
 

Abstract—Criminal  investigations  and  the  resulting  criminal 
prosecutions  are  dependent  on  quality  evidence  to  ensure 
convictions. With the increasing number of digital devices in our 
society,  a  significant  amount  of  evidence  is  digital,  and  the 
discipline of digital forensics, as a forensic science, should ensure 
the validity of this digital evidence in court. As a forensic science, 
quality assurance is crucial in the practice of digital forensics, to 
assure the court that the evidence can be trusted.  The research 
explored the current state of digital forensic quality assurance in 
the  criminal  justice  system  in  South  Africa  to  determine  what 
quality assurance practices were used, to identify any problems, 
as  well  as  possible  causes  of  any  shortcomings.  The  research 
identified significant deficiencies with regard to quality assurance 
in  digital  forensics,  and  identified  areas  that  potentially  could 
impact  negatively  in  the  court  environment  if  contested.  In 
summary,  the  general  state  of  quality  assurance  practice  in 
digital forensics was poor. Reasons identified for this included a 
lack of training in digital forensic science fundamentals, lack of 
training in quality assurance in digital forensics, high case loads, 
and poor supervision.  
 

Keywords-digital forensics; forensic science; quality assurance; 

evidence 

I. 

 INTRODUCTION 

to  address  crime 

Crime  is  a  topic  of  some  interest  in  contemporary  South 
Africa, and there is a general sense in our society that crime is 
one  of  the  biggest  problems  in  our  country.  The  criminal 
justice  system  seeks 
through  various 
processes,  including  the  investigation  thereof,  and  ultimately 
finding and prosecuting the offender in a court of law. A key 
element  necessary  to  prove  a  case  in  court  is  evidence,  and 
without evidence, no conviction is possible. As our society has 
become  more  information  based,  and  computers  and  digital 
devices have become a fundamental part of our society, so too 
has their role, and the information contained thereon, become 
part of the crime problem.  

Digital  evidence  is  now  a  fundamental  part  of  many 
investigations. Digital evidence is defined as information of a 
legal  probative  value  that  is  either  stored,  or  transmitted  in  a 
digital  form  [1].  The  proliferation  of  digital  devices  and  the 
Internet  has  meant  that  digital  evidence  can  be  present  in 
virtually  any  case,  and  is  not  limited  simply  to  computer 

crimes, but is relevant to the investigation of almost any crime 
[2]. Over half of the cases investigated by the Federal Bureau 
of Investigation use some type of digital evidence [3].  In the 
United  States  of  America,  digital  evidence  has  become 
common in courts, and cases are frequently decided on digital 
evidence [3]. 

The  Electronic  Communications  and  Transactions  Act  25 
of 2002 guides the issue of digital evidence in South African 
law, and has allowed the use of digital evidence as evidence in 
a  South  African  court  of  law  [4].  When  assigning  evidential 
weight  to  digital  evidence,  Section  15(2)  of  the  Electronic 
Communications  and  Transactions  Act  25  of  2002  guides  a 
court in how to evaluate the evidence [4]. A key factor to be 
considered in this is the reliability of the digital evidence and 
how the integrity of it was maintained.  

Digital  forensics  plays  a  critical  role  in  establishing  this, 
and there is a symbiotic relationship between digital evidence 
and  digital  forensics.  As  a  forensic  science,  digital  forensics 
has the power to persuade in a court of law, and as such it is 
crucial that the courts assess the validity of a scientific process 
before accepting its result [1]. The power of science in a court 
of  law  arises  as  a  result  of  the  supposed  objectivity  of  its 
methods [5].  In other words, the fact that evidence is scientific 
in  nature  often  adds weight  to  it  in  a  court  of  law. A  central 
assumption in this is the fact that the court of law assumes that 
the  scientific  evidence  is  produced  through  an  objective 
scientific process.  

A key factor in any court case, especially a criminal one, is 
the importance of quality evidence. This is especially important 
when  considering  that  the  standard  of  proof  which  must  be 
satisfied to obtain a conviction in a criminal court is beyond a 
reasonable doubt [6], and where evidence that is not considered 
quality evidence may be enough to create reasonable doubt of 
guilt. While traditional investigative practices have developed 
to  ensure  the  quality  of  physical  evidence,  this  is  not 
necessarily  the  case  with  digital  evidence.  With  the  growing 
importance of digital evidence in criminal prosecutions, and the 
use  of  digital  forensics  in  obtaining  that  evidence,  there  is  a 
need to assure the quality thereof to improve its value and use 
in our legal system.  

II.  THE IMPORTANCE OF QUALITY ASSURANCE IN 

DIGITAL FORENSICS 

According  to  the  National  Academy  of  Science  in  the 
United States quality assurance procedures are necessary in the 
practice  of  forensic  science  to  identify  mistakes,  scientific 
fraud, examiner bias, and to confirm the continued validity and 
reliability  of  forensic  processes  and  to  improve  on  processes 
that  need  to  be  improved  [7].  In  relation  to  digital  forensics 
practice,  with  a  particular  emphasis  on  digital  forensic 
laboratories,  a  comprehensive  quality  assurance  system  is  a 
mandatory requirement to ensure credibility [8]. 

It is critical that digital forensic units or laboratories have a 
quality management system in place, as quality assurance is a 
critical  requirement  in  the  field  of  digital  forensics  [9].  This 
means that in practical terms at the very least that documented 
procedures  and  practices  are  used  which  are  linked  to 
appropriate  standards,  and  which  must  be  followed  to  ensure 
the production of a quality product [9].  

Two of the most critical properties of digital evidence are 
its  reliability  and  completeness,  and  if  either  of  these  are 
questionable,  then  the  evidentiary  value  is  greatly  diminished 
[10]. Quality assurance can ensure that the evidence presented 
in  court  is  both  reliable  and  complete.  It  can  be  argued  that 
digital  forensic  science  has  its  own  intrinsic  quality  metric, 
which is the evidence which is admitted into court and stands 
up  to  vigorous  cross  examination  [11],  however,  quality 
assurance can increase the likelihood that the evidence and the 
processes  applied  to  it  can  successfully  stand  up  to  this 
vigorous cross examination.  

III.  THE CONSEQUENCES OF POOR QUALITY IN 

FORENSIC SCIENCE  

Defects in the digital forensic process can produce a flawed 
product, which can result in an innocent person being punished 
(having to pay either a fine, receive a prison sentence, or both), 
as  well  as  having  to  wrongfully  pay  out  money  in  a  civil 
lawsuit [12]. 

In  the  case  of  State  of  Connecticut  v.  Julie  Amero,  a 
primary  school  teacher  was  convicted  of  contributing  to  the 
delinquency  of  a  minor  because  a  spyware-infected  school 
computer in her classroom displayed pornographic sites’ pop-
ups  during  her  lectures  [3].  The  conviction  resulted  from 
incorrect  assumption  made  with  regards  the  evidence,  and 
while the conviction was ultimately overturned on review, the 
damage had already been done to an innocent person [3]. 

This  not  only  illustrates  the  power  that  forensic  science 
evidence  has  to  determining  guilt  in  a  court  of  law,  but  also 
highlights how important it is to ensure that forensic evidence 
is  correct,  as  the  consequences  of  mistakes  have  a  very  real 
human cost. Even if problems as a result of convictions based 
on  flawed  scientific  evidence  are  rare,  the  human  cost  and 
damage to public confidence in the criminal justice system and 
the courts is significant [13]. There is a fundamental legal and 
philosophical maxim which states that it is better for ten guilty 
people  to  go  free  rather  than  let  one  innocent  person  suffer 
[14].  When  there  is  poor  quality  in  forensic  science,  the 
innocent  can  most  certainly  suffer,  and  this  can  never  be 
acceptable.  To  avoid  this  happening,  the  quality  of  forensic 

science  examinations,  including  digital  forensics,  must  be 
beyond reproach. 

IV.  EXAMINING SOUTH AFRICAN DIGITAL 
FORENSIC QUALITY ASSURANCE PRACTICES  
The researcher conducted an exploratory research study to 
identify  current  quality  assurance  practices  in  the  field  of 
digital  forensics  by  digital  forensic  examiners  that  worked 
within  the  South  African  criminal  justice  system,  and  to 
identify  any  shortcomings 
this  regard  which  could 
potentially  negatively  impact  on  the  digital  evidence  and  the 
digital forensic processes before court. 

in 

criminal 

supporting 

investigations 

The population represents the full set of cases from which a 
sample can be obtained [15]. In the context of this research, the 
population  can  be  defined  as  all  full-time  digital  forensic 
practitioners 
and 
prosecutions.  This  population  is  a  very  small  one.  The 
researcher estimates that the total population of digital forensic 
practitioners within the criminal justice system in South Africa 
is  currently  less  than  100  practitioners.  This  is  based  on  the 
known numbers of digital forensic examiners in South African 
law  enforcement  agencies  which  have  a  digital  forensics 
capacity,  including  the  South  African  Police  Service,  the 
Directorate  of  Priority  Crime  Investigation, 
the  Special 
Investigating Unit, and the South African Revenue Service, as 
well as the known capacities of private sector organisations to 
which 
these 
forensics 
examinations.  

agencies 

outsourced 

digital 

Due  to  the  qualitative  and  exploratory  nature  of  the 
research,  and  the  fact  that  statistical  generalisation  from  the 
research  was  not  an  objective,  judgemental  sampling  was 
considered  the  most  appropriate  sampling  method  to  use,  as 
this would allow the researcher’s judgement to select cases that 
would best enable the research questions to be answered [15]. 
The advantage of the method is that it allows the selection of 
cases  that  are  information  rich,  and  support  the  qualitative 
focus of the research. 

To  ensure  that  an  appropriate  sample  size  is  used,  the 
research will continue to collect qualitative data until such time 
as  data  saturation  is  reached,  which  is  defined  at  the  point 
where collected data reveals few, if any, new insights [15].   

To  achieve  this,  potential  respondents  were  contacted 
directly  by  the  researcher  and  informed  of  the  nature  of  the 
research,  and  to  determine  whether  or  not  they  would  be 
willing  to  participate.  Those  that  wished  to  participate  were 
interviewed  and  data  collated,  and  the  process  repeated  until 
the  respondent’s  data  revealed  no  significant  new  insights. 
Those  individuals  that  chose  not  to  participate  cited  time 
constraints due to workloads for not participating. 

to  approximately 

The  final  sample  size  was  ten  (10)  respondents,  which 
equates 
the  estimated 
population.  Each  member  of  the  sample  was  interviewed  to 
collect the relevant data in this research. 
A.  Sample Profile 

ten  percent  of 

The respondents were grouped into three categories based 
on what type of organization they were employed by and what 

their digital forensics practice focus was. There three categories 
were: 
• 

Investigation 

(6 

• 

• 

Government/Law  Enforcement 
respondents) 
Private  Sector:  External  Service  Provider 
respondents) 
Private  Sector: 
respondents) 
in 

Internal  Service  Provider 

(2 

(2 

Respondents 

in  government  agencies 

the  Government/Law  Enforcement 
Investigation  category  are  employed  as  full-time  digital 
forensic  practitioners 
that  have 
statutory law enforcement or investigation mandates to address 
criminality.  Respondents  in  the  Private  Sector:  External 
Service  Provider  category  are  employed  as  full-time  digital 
forensic  practitioners  in  private  sector  (for  profit)  businesses 
that  provide  digital  forensic  services  as  part  of  their  service 
offerings  to  their  clients  for  the  purposes  of  addressing 
criminality  affecting  their  clients.  Respondents  in  the  Private 
Sector:  Internal  Service  Provider  category  are  employed  full-
time  as  digital  forensic  practitioners 
in  private  sector 
organizations  and  provides  digital  forensic  services  to  their 
organization  to  address  criminality  occurring  within  their 
organization, or targeting their organization.  

the 

respondents  are 

The  majority  of 

the 
Government/Law  Enforcement  sector,  which  supports  the 
assertion of Beckett & Slay [16] that the main practitioners of 
digital forensics are in the field of government law enforcement 
agencies. 

from 

The respondents practiced as digital forensic examiners in 
various  provinces  throughout  South  Africa,  and  reflect  the 
provinces in which their laboratories are located: 

Gauteng (5 respondents) 

Eastern Cape (1 respondent) 
Free State (1 respondent) 
Kwa-Zulu Natal (1 respondent) 

• 
•  Western Cape (2 respondents) 
• 
• 
• 
The  respondents  had  a  wide  range  of  experience  from  1 
year to 12 years. The average number of years’ experience of 
each respondent in the field of digital forensics was 5 years and 
six months. The sample thus represents a fairly broad range of 
experience of the digital forensic practitioner respondents. 

Digital forensic practitioners in the Private Sector: Internal 
Service  Provider  category  had  an  average  of  9  years  and  six 
months experience as digital forensic practitioners, while those 
in  the  Private  Sector:  External  Service  Provider  category  had 
on average 8 years’ experience as digital forensic practitioners. 
The average experience of digital forensic practitioners in the 
private  sector  categories  is  significantly  higher  than  that  of 
digital 
the  Government/Law 
Enforcement Investigation category which has an average of 3 
and a third years’ experience. Fifty percent of the respondents 
in the private sector had previously been employed as digital 
forensic  practitioners  in  the  Government/Law  Enforcement 
Investigation category.  

forensic  practitioners 

in 

Three  (3)  of 

in  a 
management  or  supervisor  capacity  within  their  laboratory  or 

the  respondents  were  employed 

workplace,  and  had  a  responsibility  to  supervise  the  work  of 
other  digital  forensic  practitioners.  The  remaining  seven  (7) 
respondents were not responsible for the supervision of other 
digital  forensic  practitioners.  The  sample  thus  represents  a 
balance between digital forensic practitioners with supervisory 
responsibility over other practitioners, and those that do not. 
B.  The Relationship Between Digital Evidence and Digital 

Forensics 
The respondents were questioned as to their understanding 
of  the  concept  of  digital  evidence  as  defined  by  Casey  [1], 
Carrier [17], and Solomon, Barrett, and Broom [18].  Evidence 
is the raw material used by a court of law to reach a decision on 
a criminal case brought before it. Digital evidence is the focus 
of  digital  forensics,  and  as  such  the  concept  of  what  digital 
evidence  is,  is  a  fundamental  concept  for  digital  forensic 
practitioners  to  understand.  Eight  (8)  of  the  respondents 
demonstrated  their  understanding  of  the  concept  of  digital 
evidence, while two (2) of the respondents did not demonstrate 
and  understanding  of  the  concept.  The  two  respondents  that 
had not demonstrated understanding of the concept had equated 
digital evidence with only “unlawful data”, and “evidence from 
devices  used  to  commit  crimes”,  and  did  not  consider 
exculpatory  evidence.  The  majority  of  the  sample  understood 
what digital evidence was. 

Understanding  of  the  concept  of  digital  forensics  means 
that digital forensic examiners understand that digital forensics 
is a scientific or applied scientific discipline as stated by Vacca 
[19],  Swanson,  Chamelin,  Territo  and  Taylor  [2],  Jones  and 
Valli [11], McKemmish [10], and Zatyko [20]. Seven (7) of the 
respondents demonstrated their understanding of the concept of 
digital  forensics,  while  three  (3)  of  the  respondents  did  not 
demonstrate  an  understanding  of  the  concept.  The  three 
respondents  that  had  not  demonstrated  understanding  of  the 
concept had equated digital forensics with only “the recovery 
of  evidence”,  and  “the  search  for  evidence”.  It  was  observed 
that  these  responses  came  from  respondents  working  in  the 
Private Sector: External Service Provider category. 

Digital forensics is fundamentally a process consisting of a 
number of defined components as identified by Casey [1] and 
Carrier  [17].  If  one  of  these  components  is  missing,  then  the 
digital  forensic  process  itself  is  deficient.  Nine  (9)  of  the 
respondents  demonstrated  their  understanding  of  the  various 
component  of  the  digital  forensic  process  and  the  process 
models  in  use,  while  one  (1)  of  the  respondents  did  not 
demonstrate an understanding of the concept. The respondent 
that  had  not  demonstrated  understanding  of  the  concept  had 
stated  that  digital  forensics  consists  only  of  “the  acquisition, 
examination, and reporting processes”, and did not consider the 
analysis of evidence to be part of digital forensics.  

All  of  the  respondents  felt  that  there  was  a  relationship 
between digital evidence and digital forensics. Seven (7) of the 
respondents  felt  that  this  was  due  to  the  belief  that  to  have 
admissible digital evidence, it should be obtained and produced 
through  the  application  of  digital  forensic  processes,  which 
supports Van Der Merwe, Roos, Pistorius and Eislen [4]. Three 
(3) of the respondents felt that this was due to digital forensics 
being the process used to collect and present digital evidence. 
While  these  two  different  viewpoints  on  the  relationship  are 

very similar, the former looks at the relationship in terms of the 
legal outcome of the process, while the latter looks only at the 
process and what it is applied to.  

To further explore the relationship between digital evidence 
and  digital  forensics,  the  respondents  were  asked  about  what 
factors  they  felt  could  negatively  affect  the  admissibility  or 
reliability  of  digital  evidence.  Six  (6)  of  the  respondents  felt 
that the inadequate or poor skill and knowledge of the person 
who  initially  responded  to  a  digital  crime  scene,  the  person 
who acquired the evidence, or the digital forensic practitioner 
who  examined  the  evidence  could  impact  negatively  of  the 
admissibility and reliability of digital evidence. Three (3) of the 
respondents  felt  that  not  following  accepted  digital  forensic 
practices  in  relation  to  digital  evidence  acquisition  and 
examination  could  impact  negatively  of  the  admissibility  and 
reliability  of  digital  evidence.  Six  (6)  of  the  respondents  felt 
that not maintaining a chain of custody could impact negatively 
of the admissibility and reliability of digital evidence. Two (2) 
of  the  respondents  felt  that  the  limited  knowledge  of  digital 
forensics,  digital  evidence,  and  general  “cyber”  aspects  by 
legal  practitioners  including  prosecutors,  defence  lawyers, 
advocates, magistrates and Judges could impact negatively of 
the  admissibility  and  reliability  of  digital  evidence.  Only  one 
(1) of the respondents did not identify any factors that they felt 
could negatively impact on the admissibility and reliability of 
digital evidence in court, and could potentially be explained by 
the  fact  that  this  respondent  had  the  least  amount  of  digital 
forensics experience of the entire sample. 

The  significance  of  these  negative  factors  is  that  three  of 
them fall within the domain of digital forensics, and as such it 
can  be  said  that  certain  issues  within  digital  forensics  if  not 
done  correctly  can  negatively  impact  on  the  admissibility  or 
reliability of digital evidence, which supports the position that 
there  is  a  definite  relationship  between  digital  evidence  and 
digital forensic. 
C.  The Relationship Between Digital Forensics and Forensic 

Science 
Digital forensics is an emerging forensic science discipline 
and has been formally recognised as such in recent years [7], 
[17].  Considering  that  digital  forensics  is  a  forensic  science 
discipline,  it  is  important  for  digital  forensic  practitioners  to 
understand exactly what forensic science is.  

Two 

(2)  of 

the 

respondents  demonstrated 

their 
understanding of the concept of forensic science as defined by 
Swanson,  Chamelin,  Territo,  and  Taylor  [2],  and  Hankins, 
Uehara, and Jigang, [21], while eight (8) of the respondents did 
not demonstrate an understanding of this concept. This was in 
contrast  with  the  fact  that  all  of  the  respondents  were  of  the 
opinion that digital forensics was a forensic science.  

According to Pollitt [22] and Vacca [19] forensic science, 
as  a  discipline,  consists  of  guiding  principles  which  are 
applicable  to  all  forensic  science  disciplines.  As  a  forensic 
science  discipline,  digital  forensics  will  be  guided  by  these 
principles,  as  would 
the  work  of  all  digital  forensic 
practitioners.  As  such,  knowledge  of  these  principles  are 
important  to  digital  forensic  practitioners.  The  respondents 
were  asked  which  applicable  forensic  science  principles  they 

felt were applicable to digital forensics. Two of the respondents 
(2) stated that Locard’s Principle was applicable, two (2) of the 
respondents  stated  that  the  principle  of  reproducibility  was 
applicable,  and  two  (2)  of  the  respondents  stated  that  the 
forensic process must not contaminate the evidence in any way. 
Four (4) of the respondents could not identify any applicable 
forensic  science  principles.  Of  the  six  (6)  respondents  that 
identified  applicable 
science  principles,  none 
identified more than one principle.  

forensic 

Forensic science, and all of its various sub-disciplines, is an 
applied science, and like any other scientific field, the scientific 
method,  which  forms  the  philosophical  basis  of  science,  is 
applicable  in  the  field  of  forensic  science,  and  thus  digital 
forensics.  Two  (2)  of  the  respondents  demonstrated  their 
understanding of the scientific  method, while eight (8) of the 
respondents did not understand what the scientific method was.  
D.  Understanding the Importance of Quality Assurance in 

Digital Forensics 
According  to  the  National  Research  Council  [7],  Chen, 
Tsai,  Chen  and  Yee  [8],  and  the  Association  of  Chief  Police 
Officers [9], quality assurance is deemed to be a critical issue 
in  the  practice  of  forensic  science.  Digital  forensics  is  a  sub-
discipline  of  forensic  science,  and  thus  quality  assurance  is 
critical in digital forensics practice as well. 

The  concepts  of  quality,  quality  control,  and  quality 
assurance,  must  be  understood  if  any  quality  assurance 
practices  are  to  be  effective,  and  as  such  respondents  were 
questioned as to their understanding of these concepts. Six (6) 
of  the  respondents  demonstrated  their  understanding  of  the 
concept of quality, while four (4) of the respondents did not. 
Five (5) of the respondents demonstrated their understanding of 
the concept of quality control, while five (5) of the respondents 
did  not.  Four  (4)  of  the  respondents  demonstrated  their 
understanding of the concept of quality assurance, while six (6) 
of  the  respondents  did  not  demonstrate  an  understanding  of 
quality assurance.  

Two (2) of the respondents were of the opinion that quality 
assurance  was  important  in  digital  forensics  as  it  ensured  the 
use of consistent processes, while eight (8) of the respondents 
were  of  the  opinion  that  quality  assurance  was  important  in 
digital  forensics  as  it  resulted  in  reliability  of  the  processes 
involved as well as the end product. One (1) of the respondents 
did  not  identify  any  reasons  why  quality  assurance  was 
important  in  digital  forensics,  and  could  potentially  be 
explained by the fact that this respondent had the least amount 
of digital forensics experience of the entire sample.  

Eight  (8)  of  the  respondents  were  of  the  opinion  that  a 
consequence of poor or no quality assurance in digital forensics 
would be that digital evidence may be ruled as inadmissible in 
court. Seven (7) of the respondents were of the opinion that a 
consequence of poor or no quality assurance in digital forensics 
would be that the digital forensic practitioners would lose their 
reputation and credibility.  Nine (9) of the respondents were of 
the opinion that a consequence of poor or no quality assurance 
in digital forensics would be that the State would lose its case 
in court, resulting in a potentially guilty perpetrator going free. 
One  (1)  of  the  respondents  was  of  the  opinion  that  a 

consequence of poor or no quality assurance in digital forensics 
would be that it could lead to a wrongful conviction where an 
innocent person was actually found guilty and punished.  Three 
(3) of the respondents were of the opinion that a consequence 
of  poor  or  no  quality  assurance  in  digital  forensics  would  be 
that  digital  forensic  practitioners  would  make 
incorrect 
conclusions.  

While the majority of the respondents could not adequately 
demonstrate  an  understanding  of  the  concepts  of  quality, 
quality control and quality assurance, the majority were of the 
opinion  that  quality  assurance  was  important  and  that  there 
were identifiable potential consequences for having no or poor 
quality assurance in place in the digital forensic process. 

Three  (3)  of 

that 

the  respondents  stated 

they  had 
encountered quality assurance problems during their course of 
their digital forensic examinations.  All three had encountered 
instances where image hashes had not been validated, as well 
as  where  the  failure  to  keep  backup  copies  of  evidence  had 
caused problems when the hard drives containing the evidence 
had  become  faulty  or  damaged.  The  remaining  seven  (7) 
respondents  claimed  that  they  had  never  encountered  any 
quality assurance problems. All of the respondents stated that 
they  had  not  actually  experienced  the  actual  impact  of  no  or 
poor quality assurance in an actual court case, but all felt that it 
was simply a matter of time. 
E.  Quality Assurance Practices in Digital Forensics 

The  respondents  identified  a  number  of  quality  assurance 
practices  used  by  themselves  or  their  laboratories  or  work 
places.  Two  (2)  of  the  respondents  kept  contemporaneous 
documentation  of  all  the  processes  and  actions  done  by 
themselves during the course of the forensic process. Three (3) 
of  the  respondents  followed  standard  operating  procedures. 
Five (5) of the respondents made use of a consistent standard 
examination  methodology.  Four  (4)  of  the  respondents  made 
use of peer review mechanisms. One (1) respondent stated that 
he  did  not  use  any  quality  assurance  practice.  None  of  the 
identified practices were unique to South Africa, and were the 
same  as  some  of  the  digital  forensics  quality  assurance 
practices  carried  out 
forensic 
communities. 

in  more  mature  digital 

Standard  operating  procedures  are  considered  a  crucial 
component of digital forensic quality assurance practices. Four 
(4) of the respondents had standard operating procedures in the 
digital  forensic  laboratories  or  work  places  where  they  were 
employed,  while  six  (6)  of  the  respondents  did  not  have  any 
standard  operating  procedures  in  use  in  the  digital  forensic 
laboratories  or  work  places  where  they  were  employed.  The 
majority  of  the  respondents  stated  that  they  did  not  have 
standard operating procedures. It was also noted that while four 
(4)  respondents  stated  that  they  had  documented  standard 
operating procedures in the laboratories or work places where 
they were employed, only three (3) respondents stated that they 
actually used these documented standard operating procedures 
as quality assurance practices themselves. 

Four (4) of the respondents stated that they had documented 
standard operating procedures which addresses the acquisition 
and imaging of digital evidence. Three (3) of the respondents 

that 

stated that they had documented standard operating procedures 
which  addressed  exhibit  referencing.  Three  (3)  of 
the 
respondents  stated 
they  had  documented  standard 
operating  procedures  which  address  the  examination  and 
analysis methodology used. Two (2) of the respondents stated 
that they had documented standard operating procedures which 
addressed the reporting format and standards to be used when 
documenting the findings of the digital forensic process. Two 
(2)  of  the  respondents  stated  that  they  had  documented 
standard  operating  procedures  which  governed  access  to  the 
laboratory  or  workplace.  Six  (6)  of  the  respondents  had  no 
documented standard operating procedures. Only two (2) of the 
respondents had documented standard operating procedures for 
all  of  the  five  categories  identified,  and  another  two  (2) 
respondents had documented standard operating procedures for 
only two of the five categories identified.  

the  respondents  made  use  of  pro-forma 

The  use  of  documentation  is  considered  an  essential 
component  at  all  stages  of  handling  and  processing  digital 
evidence.  All  of  the  respondents  stated  that  they  used  some 
form of documentation during the digital forensic process. Five 
(5)  of 
type 
documentation  to  document  the  imaging  process.  Two  (2)  of 
the respondents made use of pro-forma type documentation to 
document  the  processing  of  the  evidence.  Eight  (8)  of  the 
respondents  made  notes  during  their  work.  Five  (5)  of  the 
respondents  made  use  of  evidence  receipt  documentation  for 
receipt and disposal of exhibits and evidence.  

The  testing  and  control  of  the  hardware  and  software 
environment used in the acquisition, examination, and analysis 
of digital evidence is considered crucial as this ensures that it is 
working correctly. All of the respondents stated that they did 
not  test  or  control  their  forensic  software  or  hardware  in  any 
way. 

An  aspect  of  quality  assurance,  especially  in  digital 
forensics  is  avoiding  evidence  spoliation.  Seven  (7)  of  the 
respondents  stated  that  they  kept  all  of  the  evidence  in  their 
control  under  lock  and  key  at  all  times  when  they  were  not 
processing  it  to  avoid  evidence  spoliation.  Four  (4)  of  the 
respondents  stated  that  they  made  multiple  copies  of  their 
evidence  and  only  worked  on  one  copy  to  avoid  evidence 
spoliation.  Two  (2)  of  the  respondents  stated  that  they 
maintained their evidence hard drives in anti-static bags when 
not  in  use  to  avoid  evidence  spoliation.  Two  (2)  of  the 
respondents made no effort to avoid evidence spoliation.  

Quality  review  is  a  crucial  component  of  any  digital 
forensic quality assurance system. Four (4) of the respondents 
stated  that  their  laboratories  or  workplaces,  along  with  their 
work  was  subject  to  regular  physical  inspections  or  audits, 
while  six  (6)  of  the  respondents  did  not  have  any  physical 
inspections or audits of their laboratories or workplace, or their 
work.  

Four  (4)  of  the  respondents  stated  that  the  physical 
inspections  or  audits  of  their  laboratories  and  workplaces 
included a physical inspection of their laboratory or workplace, 
as  well  as  a  review  of  all  the  case  documentation.  The 
remaining six (6) respondents were not inspected or audited.  

The  majority  of  respondents  did  not  have  their  digital 
forensic  work  inspected  or  otherwise  reviewed,  meaning  that 
there  was  no  quality  oversight  in  the  work  that  they  had 
submitted.  What  is  significant  is  that  work  inspections  or 
reviews are often instituted by supervisors or managers as part 
of  standard  management  oversight.  Of  the  three  respondents 
that  had  supervisory  responsibility  over  other  digital  forensic 
practitioners,  only  one  actually  conducted  inspections  or 
reviews  of  the  work  done.  The  other  two  respondents  stated 
that they did not do so simply due to time constraints, as not 
only did they have to supervise other practitioners, but due to 
staff  shortages,  they  themselves  were  practitioners  with  their 
own case loads, and to review the work of other practitioners 
would mean that their own work would suffer. 

In more mature digital forensic communities, a number of 
formal quality assurance systems have been applied to the field 
of digital forensics, such as ISO/IEC 17025 and ASCLD-LAB. 
Only one (1) of the respondents had any knowledge of formal 
quality  assurance  systems  that  were  used  in  digital  forensics 
practice,  namely  ASCLD-LAB,  while  the  remaining  nine  (9) 
respondents  were  not  aware  of  any  formal  quality  assurance 
systems.  

The respondent that was aware of the ASCLD-LAB system 
was a digital forensic laboratory manager in the Private Sector: 
Internal  Service  Provider  category,  and  stated  that  he  would 
like to implement a system like this and personally realized the 
value thereof, but could not justify the costs of implementing 
and  maintaining  a  system 
in  a  commercial 
environment if it was not a legislated requirement. 
F.  Training and Certification 

like 

this 

In  an  effort  to  determine  the  levels  of  training  that  the 
respondents  had  received  in  quality  assurance  issues  as  it 
applied to digital forensics, the training of the respondents in 
the field of digital forensics was explored.  

The  respondents  had  received  a  combination  of  training 
categorized as either vendor specific training, or vendor neutral 
training.  

Vendor  specific  training  is  any  training  provided  to  teach 
how to use a specific piece or suite of digital forensic software, 
or  hardware,  to  perform  specific  digital  forensic  tasks,  using 
that  hardware  and/or  software.  The  courses  and  the  forensic 
tools that the training focused on, which had been attended by 
various  respondents  which  were  classified  as  vendor  specific 
training included: 

Internet Forensics (FTK) 
Applied Decryption (FTK) 
Silent Runner (Silent Runner) 

Accessdata Bootcamp (FTK) 
• 
• 
Forensic Fundamentals (FTK) 
•  Windows XP Forensics (FTK) 
• 
• 
• 
•  Windows Vista Forensics (FTK) 
•  Windows Registry Forensics (FTK) 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 

Bitpim and Cellular Data Artefacts (FTK and Bitpim) 
EnCase Computer Forensics I (EnCase) 
EnCase Computer Forensics II (EnCase) 
EnCase Advanced Internet Examinations (EnCase) 
EnCase Enterprise Examinations (EnCase) 

Vender  neutral  training  is  any  training  provided  to  teach 
general  or  specialized  digital  forensics  skills,  methods,  and 
techniques,  independent  of  any  specific  software  or hardware 
digital  forensic  tool.  These  training  courses  are  also  often 
referred  to  as  “tool  agnostic”.  The  courses  which  had  been 
attended  by  various  respondents  which  were  classified  as 
vendor neutral training included: 

FBI Computer Crime Investigation 
French Police Digital Evidence Seizure 

• 
• 
None of the respondents had received any general forensic 

science training. 

All of the respondents stated that they felt that the training 
that  they  had  received  from  the  digital  forensics  courses  that 
they had attended only dealt with some quality assurance issues 
in the actual course contents. All of the respondents stated that 
the courses that they had attended emphasized the importance 
of  cryptographic  hashing  and  hash  validation  as  critical 
processes to ensure the integrity of the digital evidence. Eight 
(8)  of  the  respondents  stated  that  the  courses  that  they  had 
attended emphasized the importance of maintaining a chain of 
custody to ensure the integrity of the digital evidence. Only one 
(1)  of  the  respondents  stated  that  the  training  received  had 
stressed  the  importance  of  repeatability,  so  that  another 
practitioner  could  examine  the  evidence  using  the  same 
procedures and processes, and reach the same conclusion.  

None  of  the  respondents  were  guaranteed  annual  digital 
forensics training by the laboratories or work places where they 
were employed. 

Three  (3)  of  the  respondents  had  earned  their  Accessdata 
Certified  Examiner  (ACE)  certification,  and  one  (1)  of  the 
respondents had also earned their EnCase Certified Examiner 
(EnCE)  certification.  Seven  (7)  of  the  respondents  had  no 
digital forensic certifications.  

The  two  certifications  certified  the  holders  thereof  as 
proficient  in  the  use  of  a  particular  digital  forensics  software 
tool set, and neither addressed specific quality assurance issues. 
While  they  may  not  have  addressed  general  digital  forensics 
quality assurance the fact that they provide an independent and 
tested  assessment  of  a  respondent’s  proficiency  to  use  a 
specific  digital  forensics  tool  set  does  have  certain  implied 
quality  assurance  dynamics,  namely  that  the  respondent  is  at 
least competent in the use of a particular digital forensic tool 
set. 

The fact that none of the respondents had received specific 
training  in  either  forensic  science,  or  that  none  of  the  digital 
forensic  training  comprehensively  addresses  digital  forensics 
quality  assurance,  could  potentially  explain  a  reason  for  the 
general  poor  overall  levels  of  quality  assurance  practices  by 
digital forensics practitioners that formed the sample. 
G.  Workload 

All of the respondents stated that they felt that their existing 
digital forensics case load was excessive and that this pressure 
and  workload  could  lead  to  poor  quality  assurance  practices 
taking  place,  through  either  taking  short  cuts  or  otherwise 
rushing  work  simply  to  get  a  case  done,  or  to  not  actually 
implementing quality assurance measures in the first place. 

V.  CONCLUSION  

The  quality  of  evidence  is  crucial  to  ensure  that  criminal 
perpetrators are not only brought before court and prosecuted. 
In  the  case  of  digital  evidence  which  is  fragile  by  its  very 
nature, special attention and care needs to be taken to ensure 
that it will be accepted in court. Digital forensics, which is an 
identified  forensic  science,  has  a  symbiotic  relationship  with 
digital  evidence,  with  digital  evidence  often  being  dependent 
on  digital  forensics  to  be  used  in  court.  With  the  high  crime 
rates  in  South  Africa,  and  the  increasing  number  of  digital 
devices containing digital evidence, it is crucial that the quality 
not  only  of  the  evidence,  but  the  processes  surrounding  it  be 
ensured so that the courts can trust the evidence. 
identified  some  of 

the  potential 
consequences of poor quality assurance in the digital forensic 
process, and the potential impact these could have not only on 
individual cases before court, but also on the criminal justice 
system  as  a  whole.  In  general,  the  research  has  shown  that 
digital  forensic  practitioners  working  within  the  criminal 
justice  system  in  South  Africa  have  a  good  understanding  of 
the  consequences  of  poor  or  non-existent  quality  assurance 
practices. 

The  research  has 

The research identified some quality assurance practices in 
use by some digital forensic practitioners in South Africa, but 
there  was  no  consistency  or  universality  in  their  practice.  In 
general,  that  state  of  quality  assurance  practices  in  digital 
forensics  by  digital  forensic  practitioners  within  the  criminal 
justice system in South Africa is poor, which creates a risk that 
their  work  could  be  legitimately  undermined  during  court 
proceedings,  leading  to  acquittals,  or  even  leading  to  them 
making  incorrect  conclusions  which  could  lead  to  innocent 
persons  being  punished.  Possible  explanations  for  the  poor 
state  of  quality  assurance  practice  identified  in  the  research 
include  lack  of  training  in  quality  assurance  and  general 
forensic  science,  excessive  case 
inadequate 
supervisory and quality oversight. 

loads,  and 

Based on the findings of this research, it is recommended 

that additional research be carried out to identify: 

  The nature of the case loads experienced and the 

impact this has on quality assurance 

  The significant pressures within the working 

environment which contribute to a breakdown in 
quality assurance practices 

  Why supervisory oversight is not adequate or 

effective 

  The limitation of current digital forensics training in 

South Africa with regards to quality assurance 
practices 

 

REFERENCES 

[1]  Casey,  E.  (2004).  Digital  Evidence  and  Computer  Crime  (2nd  Edition 

ed.). London: Academic Press. 

 

[2]  Swanson, C. R., Chamelin, N. C., Territo, L., & Taylor, R. W. (2006). 

Criminal Investigation (9th Edition ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill. 

[3]  Peisert, S., Sishop, M., & Marzullo, K. (2008). Computer Forensics in 
Forensics. Systematic Approaches to Digital Forensic Engineering (pp. 
102-122). IEEE. 

[4]  Van  Der  Merwe,  D.,  Roos,  A.,  Pistorius,  T.,  &  Eiselen,  S.  (2008). 
and  Communications  Technology  Law.  Durban: 

Information 
LexisNexis. 

[5]  Hanna, K. E., & Mazza, A.-M. (2006). Discussion of the Committee on 
Daubert  Standards.  National  Research  Council.  Washington  DC: 
National Academies Press. 
Joubert, C. (Ed.). (2001). Applied Law for Police Officials (2nd Edition 
ed.). Lansdowne: Juta. 

[6] 

[7]  National  Research  Council.  (2009).  Strengthening  Forensic  Science  in 
the  United  States:  A  Path  Forward.  Washington  DC:  National 
Academies Press. 

[8]  Chen, P. S., Tsai, L. M., Chen, Y.-C., & Yee, G. (2005). Standardizing 
the  Construction of  a  Digital  Forensics  Laboratory. First  International 
Workshop  on  Systematic  Approaches  to  Digital  Forensic  Engineering 
(pp. 40-47). IEEE. 

[9]  Association  of  Chief  Police  Officers.  (2005).  ACPO  Advice  and  Good 
Practice  Guide  for  Managers  of  Hi-Tech/Computer  Crime  Units. 
National  Hi-Tech  Crime  Unit,  Association  of  Chief  Police  Officers. 
London: Association of Chief Police Officers. 

[10]  McKemmish, R. (2008). When is Digital Evidence Forensically Sound? 
In I. Ray, & S. Shenoi (Eds.), Advances in Digital Forensics IV (pp. 3-
15). Boston: Springer. 

[11]  Jones, A., & Valli, C. (2009). Building a Digital Forensic Laboratory. 

Burlington: Syngress. 

[12]  Wiles, J., Alexander, T., Ashlock, S., Ballou, S., Depew, L., Dominguez, 
G.,  et  al.  (2007).  Techno  Security's  Guide  to  E-Discovery  and  Digital 
Forensics. Burlington: Syngress. 

[13]  House  of  Commons  Science  and  Technology  Committee.  (2005). 

Forensic Science on Trial. London: The Stationary Office Limited. 

[14]  Greene,  E.,  &  Heilbrun,  K.  (2011).  Wrightsman's  Psychology  and  the 

Legal System (7th Edition ed.). Belmont: Wadsworth. 

[15]  Saunders, M., Lewis, P., & Thornhill, A. (2009). Research Methods for 

Business Students (5th Edition ed.). Harlow: Prentice Hall. 

[16]  Beckett,  J.,  &  Slay,  J.  (2007).  Digital  Forensics:  Validation  and 
Verification  in  a  Dynamic  Work  Environment.  40th  Annual  Hawaii 
International Conference on System Sciences (pp. 266-275). IEEE. 

[17]  Carrier, B. (2005). File System Forensic Analysis. Upper Saddle River: 

Addison-Wesley. 

[18]  Solomon, M. G., Barrett, D., & Broom, N. (2005). Computer Forensics 

Jump Start. Alameda: Sybex. 

[19]  Vacca,  J.  R.  (2005).  Computer  Forensics:  Computer  Crime  Scene 

Investigation (2nd Edition ed.). Boston: Thomson. 

[20]  Zatyko,  K.  (2007,  February/March).  Defining  Digital  Forensics.  (C. 

Janson, Ed.) Forensic Magazine , 4 (1), pp. 18-22. 

[21]  Hankins, R., Uehara, T., & Jigang, L. (2009). A Comparative Study of 
Forensic  Science  and  Computer  Forensics.  Third  IEEE  International 
Conference on Secure Software Integration and Reliability Improvement 
(pp. 230-239). IEEE. 

[22]  Pollitt, M. (2008). Applying Traditional Forensic Taxonomy to Digital 
Forensics. In I. Ray, & S. Shenoi (Eds.), Advances in Digital Forensics 
(pp. 17-26). Boston: Springer. 

