A Software Gateway to Affordable and Effective

Information Security Governance in SMMEs

Jacques Coertze

Institute for ICT Advancement

Nelson Mandela Metropolitan University

Port Elizabeth, South Africa

Email: jacques.coertze@gmail.com

Rossouw von Solms

Institute for ICT Advancement

Nelson Mandela Metropolitan University

Port Elizabeth, South Africa

Email: rossouw.vonsolms@nmmu.ac.za

Abstract—It has been found that many small, medium
and micro enterprises (SMMEs) do not comply with sound
information security governance principles, speciﬁcally those
principles involved in drafting information security policies
and monitoring compliance, mainly as a result of restricted
resources and expertise. Research suggests that this problem
occurs worldwide and that the impact it has on SMMEs is great.
In previous research an information security governance model
was established to assist SMMEs in addressing information
security governance issues and concerns. In order to provide
SMMEs with a practical approach for applying this model,
further research was conducted to establish a software program
that demonstrates the model’s practical feasibility. The aim of
this paper is to introduce this software program, called The
Information Security Governance Toolbox (ISGT), by means of
its various components, workings and beneﬁts. Furthermore, a
focus-group study’s evaluation results are offered that suggest
that
to SMMEs in addressing their
information security governance implementation challenges and
offer value for industry.

the program is useful

information

Keywords—automation,

corporate
security,
governance, enterprise security, IT governance,
information
security governance, managing information security, security
policy and procedures, methodologies for securing small/medium
size enterprises

I. INTRODUCTION

Information is known to be one of

the most critical
iv]. Businesses
assets of the modern-day business [1, p.
nowadays use information for a plethora of concerns, ranging
from production and decision making to gaining competitive
advantage over rivals to name but a few [2, p. viii]. Similarly,
information technology (IT), acting as the custodian of
information,
is gaining ever-increasing importance in the
modern marketplace [3, p. 13] as it today may account for
as much as two-thirds of the value or capital of an enterprise
[4]. Unfortunately, this high dependence on information and
IT also brings with it many responsibilities that have to be
addressed [1, p. iv], in particular that of information security
and the proper management thereof [6].

Although information security management plays a vital
role in ensuring that adequate measures are taken to protect
information in a business,
it has become
imperative for information security and its management also
to be well governed should not be overlooked [8, pp. 1-6].

the fact

that

Hence, a process commonly termed ”information security
governance” has been proposed [6].

Unfortunately, many small, medium and micro enterprises
(SMMEs)1 are struggling to address information security
governance adequately, owing to the volatile economic
challenges around the world including recessions, wars and
poverty, as well as a general lack of resources and expertise
[9]–[11]. In order to alleviate this difﬁculty, previous research
[12] has established an information security governance model
(see Fig. 1)
that could facilitate the implementation of
sound information security governance principles in these
enterprises.

It has, however, been realised that although the newly
it may supply
established model provided many beneﬁts,
countless more
if used to develop an automated or
semi-automated software program. Accordingly, a software
program has been developed to demonstrate that such an
implementation is feasible.

The software program mentioned forms the primary concern
of this paper and will be detailed as follows: Firstly, the
program and an elaborate discussion of its workings will
be introduced. Secondly, a discussion of the beneﬁts that
accrue from this program will follow. Thereafter the results
of an evaluation that was performed on the program will be
discussed.

II. INTRODUCTION TO THE ISG TOOLBOX

Previous research [12] described the process leading to the
establishment of an information security governance model
for the implementation of information security governance in
organisations with limited resources and expertise. This model
was subsequently used as a basis for the development of a
semi-automated software program to guide and assist SMMEs
in their information security governance efforts.

In this context, the goal of the program was to demonstrate
in a software

the feasibility of implementing the model
product.

1This paper focuses speciﬁcally on small and medium enterprises when
referring to SMMEs, as their management structure more closely supports
and recommends the components of the model and the supportive software
program. It should be noted that micro enterprises may still beneﬁt from the
contribution of this paper, although their management structure may require
some customisation and selective usage.

Fig. 1. The Information Security Governance Model

As already mentioned the software program carries the title
of The Information Security Governance Toolbox (ISGT) and
was implemented as a stand-alone desktop application using
three-tier software architecture in a ﬁle-sharing environment.
This program extends the functionality offered by an existing
information security management software program developed
by Hoppe, Van Niekerk and Von Solms [16] based on research
conducted by Vermeulen and Von Solms [17] amongst others.
Having introduced the software program, it now becomes
necessary to examine its internal workings and components.

III. MECHANICS OF THE ISG TOOLBOX

The software program consists primarily of two phases,
namely, a direct and a control phase, each of which consists of
two components. These four components in turn map directly
onto the requirements embedded in the information security
governance model (see A, B, C & D in Fig. 1).

The following subsections introduce the two phases of
the program in addition to the four components. This will
be followed by a section in which each component will be
elaborated on individually.

A. Toolbox phases

control phase.

The program exhibits two distinct phases a direct and a

The direct phase aims to facilitate, among other things, the
establishment of board directives, propose a set of modiﬁable
security controls
corresponding
information security policies.

and dynamically draft

In contrast, the control phase affords the user a compliance
analysis exercise in respect of the security controls and
company standards established during the direct phase, as well
as the possibility of conducting a further executive involvement
evaluation exercise to evaluate executive management’s
involvement and efforts in relation to information security
governance.
B. Toolbox components

The above-mentioned phases are made possible by the many

components embedded in the program.

The components that map onto the phases of the program

are as follows:

• the direct phase consists of

Executive ManagementSenior and Middle ManagementLower Management and AdministrationStrategic Level(Directives)Tactical Level(Policies & Company Standards)Operational Level(Procedures)DirectExecuteControl(B)     Information Security Policy Architecture Establishment & Security Control Selection(C)  Security Controls & Policy Compliance Analysis(D)    Executive Effort Evaluation(A)   Executive Directive ExerciseDirective QuestionsDirectives&Security RequirementsSecondary Policies / CompanyStandardsSecurity ProceduresSecurity Controls & Policy Compliance ResultsDirectives Compliance ResultsDue Care IndicatorCorporate Information Security Policy– an executive directive exercise (refer A in Fig. 1)

∗ which assists executive management

in the
sound information security
establishment of
board directives indicating their
involvement,
commitment and strategic vision for information
security.

– the establishment of

information security policy
architecture (ISPA) and a security control selection
process (refer B in Fig. 1)
∗ which
the

establishment

of

facilitates

the proposal

security requirements,

an
information security policy architecture in the
user organisation by means of the identiﬁcation
of
and
selection of security controls, and the drafting of
dynamic policy. Thus, strategic- and tactical-level
management is guided by the establishment of
security requirements for the user organisation.
Furthermore, applicable security controls are
proposed for selection by the user in addition
to indicate the desired
to allowing the user
compliance or adherence level
is sought
for
controls. Subsequently,
supporting security procedures are presented
for selection based on the security controls
these measures facilitate the
selected. All of
ultimate goal,
the dynamic drafting of
the security documentation required to enforce
the information security measures of the user
organisation.

these

each

that

that

is,

of

• the control phase consists of

– company

a

and

security

standards

controls
compliance analysis exercise (refer C in Fig.
1)
∗ which allows the user to perform a compliance
analysis exercise in respect of the security controls
and company standards established during the
direct phase; thus, identifying any weaknesses or
improper implementation of the proposed security
controls.

– an executive effort or due care analysis exercise

(refer D in Fig. 1)
∗ which

empowers

executive management

to
evaluate its
information security governance
involvement and efforts; thus, allowing for the
identiﬁcation of a lack of due care or due
diligence concerning its
information security
governance duty.

In addition, two additional components were introduced,
namely, a knowledge base component added to give users of
the program background information on information security
and its proper management and governance, and secondly, a
user details capturing component allowing the user to enter
his/her personal and/or company details for subsequent use by
the program.

Each of these program components will be discussed in

more detail in the following section.

IV. TOOLBOX COMPONENTS IN DETAIL

A. Knowledge base

The program operates in terms of an interactive wizard
with the purpose of accompanying users step by step through
the process ﬂow speciﬁed in the model. The wizard starts
by introducing the user to the knowledge base component.
As previously mentioned, this component is responsible for
educating the user on the core concepts and principles of
information security, its management and governance, as well
as emphasising the importance of adhering to a structured and
disciplined process when implementing it in an organisation.
This module was implemented using a series of pre-established
MS PowerPoint slide shows which are embedded in the
program. Although embedded in nature, these slide shows
are nonetheless free standing and could be frequently updated
independently of the program to offer the user the latest facts.
Thus, by completing this component it can be said that the
user of the program will be sufﬁciently educated on the core
concepts and principles of information security, as well as its
management and governance.

B. Capturing of user details

Once the user has been made aware of the contents of the
knowledge base, the next step is for the user to enter his/her
personal and/or company details in the ﬁelds provided for
use during the drafting of information security documentation
by the program. These may include the company name,
logo, telephone number, email address, chief executive ofﬁcer
(CEO) and name of the party responsible for information
security.

Thus, by completing this component it can be said that the
program now has in its database the user’s personal and/or
company details for use when drafting information security
documentation at a later stage.

Subsequently, the wizard offers the user the option to either
engage the direct or the control phase. The former is discussed
in the following subsection.

C. The direct phase

1) Executive directive exercise: The direct phase starts
with an executive directive exercise (refer A in Fig. 1).
Executive management is hereby asked a series of eleven
thought-provoking security-related questions which were
adapted from the research conducted by Von Solms and
Von Solms [18], per example: ”Information is an important
business asset to your organization. Do you agree with this
statement?”

As seen, each of the questions from the research by
Von Solms and Von Solms [18] was adapted to facilitate
either a positive (yes) or negative (no) response. In the
event of a negative response being submitted, a pre-set
information security governance awareness statement and
question follows in order to afford executive management

an opportunity to re-evaluate and possibly change its initial
response. Should the initial negative response remain,
the
wizard then indicates that executive management should seek
guidance and education on the matter of information security
and its proper governance and will not allow the respondent
to progress further. As soon as all the questions have been
answered with a positive response, the program uses reasoning
and inference to establish corresponding board directives.

It is worth mentioning that, during the development of this
component; this and various other approaches were effectively
investigated and considered. The above-mentioned approach
was, however, deemed the most feasible as it requires minimal
expertise and knowledge and is not overly complex; thus it is
ideal for use by SMMEs.

In conclusion, when this component has been completed
it can be said that a series of board directives will have
thus indicating executive management’s
been established,
information security in
commitment
the organisation, which will
then form the input for the
information security policies that will subsequently be drafted.

to and vision for

2) ISPA establishment:

a) Security requirements analysis: The next step of
the direct phase entails the establishment of an information
security policy architecture (refer B in Fig. 1) using security
requirement
security control proposal and
selection, and dynamic policy drafting.

identiﬁcation,

The identiﬁcation of an organisation’s security requirements
forms the ﬁrst step, which aims to assist strategic- and
tactical-level management in the user organisation with the
establishment of security requirements.

an

that

It was

determined

organisation’s

security
requirements may be formulated by making use of a
pre-established business analysis questionnaire consisting
of 64 questions based on a security requirements analysis
approach, as established by Von Solms and Gerber [19].
Each of the questions included in the business analysis
to a speciﬁc security requirement,
questionnaire refers
namely, conﬁdentiality,
integrity, availability, authentication
or auditability. However, in order to assess the importance of
security requirements properly, each security requirement is
addressed by a number of questions in the questionnaire. The
answer selected for each of these questions in turn determines
a rating (e.g. low, medium or high), which is then assigned
to each security requirement.

It

should be noted that during the development of
this component, the possibility of performing a traditional
risk analysis exercise was also investigated. However, this
approach was shown to require extensive knowledge of an
organisation’s information and IT assets, and the speciﬁc
threats and vulnerabilities they are faced with, which can vary
considerably from organisation to organisation. Further, such
a risk analysis involves a great deal of expertise, effort and
time, which most SMMEs simply do not have [20]. Hence,
it was deemed unﬁt for use in the program. Instead,
the
security requirements analysis approach [19] was adopted, as
mentioned above, since it is simpler and allows for greater

ﬂexibility and scalability. In retrospect, however, it should be
stated that an organisation could still supplement the approach
used in the program with a risk analysis exercise or other
approach, if necessary.

In summary, by completing this component

it can be
said that the security requirements of the organisation will
have been identiﬁed, which subsequently allows for
the
identiﬁcation and proposal of suitable security controls to
address these requirements.

and

their

ratings,

requirements

b) Security control selection: Based on the identiﬁed
security
the wizard
subsequently presents the user with a series of modiﬁable
security controls. These security controls originate from
ISO/IEC 27002 [2] and indicate an appropriate baseline
protection for the organisation in line with their security
requirements. It should, however, be noted that the security
controls presented merely serve as a guide for implementing
information security in accordance with the organisation’s
operational environment. Thus, the user can select or de-select
security controls, provided that a legitimate reason is provided
in accordance with the statement of applicability proposed by
ISO/IEC 27001 [21, p. 8].

Thus, following the completion of this component a set of
applicable security controls will have been presented to the
user and subsequently selected or de-selected for use in the
organisation.

c) Security control compliance target setting: Concurrent
with security control selection, the user is also prompted to
indicate the desired compliance or adherence level that is
sought for each security control. This constitutes compliance
target setting (set at a certain percentage level) for each
control. In this regard, the level of compliance ranges from 0
to 100%. The ideal would be to enforce 100%, but since some
enterprises using the program are only starting to initiate their
information security governance implementation, it may be
ill-advised to expect such a high compliance level. The desired
compliance or adherence level for each security control is in
turn stored by the program for use during the control phase.
The completion of this component thus indicates that an
ideal compliance/target indicator will have been determined
for each selected security control, which will be used during
one of the later components.

d) Security procedure selection: After the completion of
the security control selection step, the user is presented with a
series of security procedures for each of the security controls.
The set of selectable security procedures originates from a
variety of sources, of which the implementation guidance
clauses of ISO/IEC 27002 [2] are the primary contributor.
This step,
is
deemed necessary as it serves as a guideline for achieving the
objectives of each security control [22, p. 54]. It should be
noted that currently only security procedures pre-established
during the program’s development can be selected; however, it
is envisaged that users may in future add customised security
procedures according to their needs or circumstances.

the selection of security procedures,

that

is,

Thus, following the completion of this component a set of

applicable security procedures for each security control will
have been proposed to the user and subsequently selected or
de-selected for use in the organisation.

security

of
the

e) Dynamic

generation
Following

security
documentation:
of
the
organisation’s
selection
of appropriate security controls and supportive security
procedures,
the program dynamically drafts the security
documentation required to enforce these information security
measures.

information
establishment
the

requirements

and

This documentation includes the drafting of the following:
• a corporate information security policy, both a short and

long version

• secondary-level policies in the form of various supportive
the identiﬁed security

company standards that reﬂect
controls

• corresponding, policy-linked, security procedures
• a statement of applicability.
This set of documentation is offered to the user as
personalised tailor-made Word documents, which may be
the
modiﬁed and adjusted to suit
the speciﬁc needs of
organisation. The program also stores a copy of
this
documentation, which may be accessed at any time unless
new documentation is drafted.

Hence, by completing this component,

the
establishment of information security policy architecture, a
corporate information security policy will have been drafted,
supported by a series of secondary-level policies or company
standards which, in turn, is further endorsed by applicable
security procedures.

that

is,

Von Solms and Von Solms [1, pp. 74-75] indicate that
an organisation’s information security policy architecture
comprises the components, or documents,
facilitate
the directing of
through the
dynamic generation of this documentation by the program,
the information security policy architecture of
the user
organisation is established, as well as the appropriate selection
of information security controls.

information security. Thus,

that

in

their

These

components

aforementioned

entirety
constitute the direct phase of the program, and may be
performed whenever the operational environment of the user
organisation changes, including when new information and
IT assets are purchased or new threats and/or vulnerabilities
are identiﬁed. It may also be necessary to repeat this phase
periodically to ensure that the documentation that has been
generated is kept up to date.
D. The control phase

In support of the model’s requirements and the program’s
direct phase, the control phase of the model should also be
initiated quarterly, bi-annually or at least annually.

Owing to the dynamic nature of compliance and adherence,
it is advised that this phase should not be neglected [23]. Since
documentation produced during the direct phase does not
automatically guarantee compliance and adherence [18], it is
essential that regular monitoring and control take place in the

organisation. Hence, the primary goal of the control phase of
the program is to evaluate compliance with the documentation
produced and then institute corrective action if required.

1) The analysis of company standards and security control
compliance: The commencement of the control phase is
marked by a company standards and security controls
compliance analysis exercise (refer C in Fig. 1). This exercise
starts with the user choosing to perform either a full or
limited-scope compliance analysis of the established security
controls and company standards. In the event that a limited
scope is selected, the user is given the option to select the
company standards and accompanying security controls that
need to be analysed. This step allows for ﬂexibility, as an
organisation may choose to analyse only speciﬁc security
controls or company standards at a given time in order to
reduce costs and interruptions.

Once a full or limited scope compliance analysis has been
selected and an indication provided of the security controls
and company standards to be analysed, the user is presented
with a questionnaire, which contains a series of security
control-related compliance analysis questions, with at least
three questions for each security control. A minimum of three
questions was decided in order to allow for triangulation to
occur and a more accurate compliance assessment to be made,
especially since SMMEs are often not knowledgeable about
security controls and guessing might occur otherwise.

As the security controls that can be selected during the
direct phase originate from ISO/IEC 27002 [2], ISO/IEC
27001 [21] compliance analysis questions made available by
the InfoSec Institute [24] were used for this purpose. Although
other sets of questions exist, this set was chosen as it is one of
the few that offer more than one analysis question per security
control. This was deemed vital for making the compliance
analysis process understandable and for ease of use.

Each of the questions in this set are presented in the form
of a ﬁve-point Likert scale, on which users indicate the level
of security control compliance or adherence achieved, ranging
from no adherence or implementation to complete fulﬁlment
and adherence.

When the responses to these questions have been submitted,
a graphical compliance analysis report
is produced using
a series of complex mathematical equations and weighted
calculations. This report is speciﬁcally aimed at tactical and
executive management and makes use of colour coding and
key performance indicators (KPIs) to offer a clear indication
of the compliance level being achieved for the selected security
controls, the company standards and the corporate information
security policy as a whole. It is worth mentioning that this
report also makes use of the security control compliance target
indicators that would have been captured during the security
control selection process in order to indicate whether the
desired outcome has been achieved.

Thus, following the completion of this component a full or
limited compliance analysis will have been performed on the
security controls instigated in the organisation and a graphical
compliance analysis report produced which could be used for

taking corrective action.

V. BENEFITS OF THE ISG TOOLBOX

2) Executive due care analysis: On completion of the
compliance analysis exercise,
the next step is to give
executive management an opportunity to perform a due
care analysis exercise (refer D in Fig. 1). A series of
eleven thought-provoking questions are hereby posed that
allow executive management to investigate and evaluate its
information security governance efforts in terms of the due
care and diligence required by the model, per example: ”Do
you accept that information is a critically important business
asset to your organisation?”

As seen, each question that executive management is asked
elicits a positive (yes) or negative (no) response. In turn, the
responses indicate executive management’s efforts as regards
the due care checklist
that was developed by Von Solms
and Von Solms [18], which was also used to construct the
executive directive exercise component found in the direct
phase. Thus, a clear correlation exists between the board
directives established by the aforementioned component, the
documentation that is generated and the checklist used in
this exercise. For example, one board directive reads ”a
Corporate Information Security Policy (CISP) must be deﬁned,
introduced and maintained to guide all efforts to mitigate risks
threatening business information”. Using the program, a CISP
is generated and maintained that satisﬁes the board directive;
furthermore this in turn satisﬁes the due care analysis question,
”Did you create and express a clear vision to mitigate business
information risks to an acceptable level using a CISP?”

In summary, following the completion of this component
it can be said, according to Von Solms and Von Solms [18],
that executive management will have been offered a due care
and diligence indicator perhaps pointing to a possible lack of
due care, which can subsequently assist management in taking
corrective action.

These components in their entirety constitute the control
phase of the program. This phase may be performed on a
periodic basis as required by the organisation and/or suggested
by best practices. The direct and control phases which
constitute the workings of this program thus combine to form
the direct-control action cycle that is exhibited by information
security governance [6].

The program therefore acts as an aid for organisations,
in particular SMMEs, when implementing or
improving
information security governance. This is achieved by the
program, as it provides actionable/practical components and
processes to guide organisations through the information
security governance implementation and/or
improvement
process. The program includes the development of relevant
information security documentation as well as the maintenance
and compliance analysis of such documentation.

As SMMEs are often neither aware of nor knowledgeable
about the above-mentioned components and processes [13, pp.
82-83], this program offers signiﬁcant beneﬁts for addressing
and possibly alleviating this problem.

The development of this program holds many beneﬁts
for organisations with limited expertise and resources. This
section highlights just a few of the beneﬁts that is associated
with this program.

Affordability. The fact that freely accessible technologies
and components were used for the construction and operation
of
this program renders it affordable while also being
comprehensive in nature.

Simplicity. During the construction of

this program,
components and techniques were identiﬁed and subsequently
implemented that are not overly complex and that can be used
and interpreted easily. This refers speciﬁcally to the security
requirements analysis and executive directive exercise.

Scalability. SMMEs are characterised by their varying size
and ﬂexibility in terms of resources and expertise [13, pp.
82-83]. With this in mind, all the techniques and components
introduced in this program are scalable. Hence, the output
of the program adapts according to the speciﬁcs of the
organisation using it.

Applicability. Many off-the-shelf

information security
solutions are available on the open market, but they cater
mainly for large organisations [20]. This program is tailored
speciﬁcally for SMMEs and takes note of their limitations and
restrictions. This also applies to the output and input that this
program offers and requires.

Flexibility. SMMEs are characterised by their ﬂexibility and
adaptive nature [25, p. 9]. This includes their size, ﬁnancial
standing and management structures [26]. As this program
allows for ﬂexibility and a degree of customisation, it does not
limit or restrict the user organisation from using only speciﬁc
security controls or documentation and so on. It acts merely
as a guide offering the best practice-driven baseline applicable
to the user organisation.

practice.

International management

Compliance with international management and governance
standards/best
and
governance standards and best practice offer speciﬁc guidance
to organisations in order for successful information security
governance implementation and continued operations to be
assured. This program is based speciﬁcally on and adheres to
the guidance offered by ISO/IEC 27002 [2], ISO/IEC 27001
[21], as well as ISO/IEC 38500 [27] and CobiT 5 [3].

VI. EVALUATION OF THE ISG MODEL AND TOOLBOX
During the development of

the software program, a
fully-functional and complete evolutionary desktop application
proof-of-concept prototype featuring all the program’s ﬁner
workings and components and the model it was based on were
evaluated to determine the program’s future usage in and value
for the SMME community. The evaluation of this prototype
took the form of a focus group-like study, given the availability
of three respected SMMEs and the fact that the potential
industry users of the program wanted to be reached for
feedback and commenting. Furthermore, the focus group-like
study facilitated answers to questions that the development of
the program could not resolve.

As mentioned, three respected SMMEs were identiﬁed at an
IT and security (ISACA) conference based on size, that is, one
in each size category (micro, small, and medium enterprise),
and were invited to participate in the evaluation study. This
was deemed critical as the program’s audience included all
sized enterprises within the SMME domain and allowed for a
collective SMME group or domain consensus to be reached.
Each participant was visited and underwent a short
informative workshop session conducted by the authors and
developer at their premises in order to provide them with
details on the purpose of the study, as well as an overview
of the research and the use of the prototype. Afterwards, this
prototype was made available to each of the SMMEs on a
trial basis and a questionnaire was provided to be completed
within a speciﬁed time in order to evaluate the feasibility of
the components and workings of the prototype and, indirectly,
the model.

The feedback and comments that emanated from the
responses to this questionnaire indicated, although not the
primary aim, that some usability issues were present in the
implementation of the prototype. Comments in this regard
include among others:

”The process I had to follow throughout the program
was at times not clear.”
”I found the slides in the knowledge base to be basic
and not visually appealing at times.”

Nevertheless, these usability issues were shown to have very
little effect on the overall use of the prototype. Moreover, these
issues were subsequently addressed in the development of the
ﬁnal software program.

One comment made by a participant in response to an item

on the questionnaire read:

”I found that the amount of documentation generated
was too much. If a company would go with the
standard suggestions there would be too many
policies and procedures and would actually make
management difﬁcult.”

This comment was acknowledged; however, it should be
kept in mind that the program is not size-orientated, but rather
security requirements-orientated. Accordingly,
the security
requirements of each individual SMME directly inﬂuence the
amount and coverage of the documentation generated by the
software program.

Another questionnaire respondent

raised the following

vexation:

”I was concerned at times that the Protection of
Personal Information Bill (POPI) had not been taken
into account.”

This comment had merit as

these regulatory issues
in industry. In response it
are becoming more prominent
can be said that
for
some regulatory elements to be addressed as part of the
security requirements analysis component. However, this could
certainly be enhanced in future versions of the software
program by means of intensive research in this ﬁeld.

the software program does cater

The following suggestion and/or comment also originated

from the questionnaire responses:

”Better technology such as Software-as-a-Service
(SaaS) could have been used in addition to a
web-based platform for the implementation of the
program.”

This suggestion was noted and corresponds with the initial
vision for the operation and development of the software
program [28]. Unfortunately, given that the program stores
and utilises conﬁdential business information, this particular
approach was deemed unfeasible upon implementation as the
safety of the information could not be guaranteed. Similarly,
an issue arose as to who would own the information once it
has been captured on a web-based platform. Hence, to avoid
these concerns, the three-tier desktop application architecture
model was adopted instead.

Although many comments, suggestions and concerns were
raised, the respondents of the study did come to a consensus,
supported by subjective observations,
the information
security governance model, and the supporting software
program, are indeed feasible and hold many beneﬁts for
SMMEs in terms of assisting them with the implementation
of information security governance. Responses supporting this
conclusion read:

that

”A super, innovative product which I believe has a
lot of potential - especially for smaller organisations
that do not have a lot of resources to commit to
something like information security.”
”On the whole, I think the concept is good. It does
provide many organisations with a cost effective way
to put information security policies in place.”

It can thus be stated on the basis of this feedback that the
software program and model certainly proves to be valuable
to SMMEs, but they can probably be further enhanced in the
future to provide even more effective support.

VII. CONCLUSION

Information and IT, as an enabler, is of great importance to
the success of nearly all modern-day businesses. However, as
these businesses continue to place an ever higher dependence
on information and IT, so too should their protection be
considered. Nevertheless,
for
information security to be successful in defending information,
it must be well managed and governed. Thus, the requirement
for
information security governance in all organisations,
irrespective of their size, is becoming of grave importance.

the literature suggests that

Regrettably, as a result of a general

lack of resources
and expertise, many SMMEs are struggling to address
information security governance adequately.
to
alleviate this difﬁculty, previous research has established an
information security governance model that could facilitate
the implementation of sound information security governance
principles in these enterprises.

In order

Unfortunately, it was subsequently realised that SMMEs
currently require practical rather than theoretical assistance

in the form of processes, procedures and aids that they can
use in a real-world setting. Thus, it was realised that many
more beneﬁts could be achieved if the model were to be
used to develop an automated or semi-automated software
application. Accordingly, a software program was developed
to demonstrate that such an implementation was feasible and
it was introduced in this paper as The Information Security
Governance Toolbox (ISGT).

This paper introduced the software program in conjunction
with a detailed discussion of
its components and ﬁner
workings. Afterwards, the beneﬁts exhibited by this program
were also highlighted.

The evaluation results of a focus group-like study performed
on the program using a proof-of-concept evolutionary
prototype, speciﬁcally on its ﬁner workings and embedded
components, were also shared. The feedback and comments,
the program is
per
that
feasible and justify the expectation that
it holds many
beneﬁts for SMMEs in their information security governance
implementation.

respondent consensus,

suggest

It is envisaged that this program will continue to receive
attention and enhancements in the future, which may one
day lead to the availability of a fully-ﬂedged commercial
product. Areas for future research include the performing
of a security analysis on the program to determine whether
the proposed solution enforces security protection within
the SMME setting and to verify that the proposed solution
actually guarantees the same or better levels of security than
any existing solutions. Furthermore, comprehensive usability
testing could be performed on the program and corrections
made.

It is suggested that, since SMMEs form such an important
part of the economic structure of countries around the world,
information security researchers should remain vigilant
in
their attempts to assist them with both theoretical models and
practical aids.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
assistance
towards

this

of

(NRF)

The ﬁnancial

the National Research
hereby
Foundation
acknowledged. Opinions expressed and conclusions arrived
at, are those of the authors and are not necessarily to be
attributed to the NRF.

research

is

REFERENCES

[1] S. Von Solms and R. Von Solms, Information Security Governance.

Springer, 2008.

[2] ISO/IEC 27002,

information security management.
Organization for Standardization (ISO), 2005.

Information technology: Code of practice for
International

Switzerland:

[3] ISACA, COBIT 5, 2012.
[4] K. Melymuka, “IT does

so matter!” 2003.

[Online]. Available:

https://www.computerworld.com/s/article/82738/IT does so matter

[5] R. Nolan, “Ubiquitous IT: The case of the Boeing 787 and implications
for strategic IT research,” The Journal of Strategic Information
Systems, vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 91–102, Jun. 2012. [Online]. Available:
http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0963868711000801

[6] R. Von Solms and S. Von Solms, “Information security governance: A
model based on the direct-control cycle,” Computers & Security, vol. 25,
no. 6, pp. 408–412, 2006.

[7] M. Whitman and H. Mattord, Principles of information security, 4th ed.

Course Technology, 2012.

[8] K. Brotby, Information Security Governance: A Practical Development
and Implementation Approach. Honoken, New Jersey: John Wiley &
Sons, 2009.

[9] S. Goodman and A. Harris, “The coming African tsunami of information
insecurity,” Communications of the ACM, vol. 53, no. 12, p. 24, 2010.
[10] E. Yildirim, G. Akalp, S. Aytac, and N. Bayram, “Factors inﬂuencing
information security management
and medium-sized
enterprises: A case study from Turkey,” International Journal of
Information Management, 2010.

in small-

[11] C. Upfold and D. Sewry, “An investigation of information security
in small and medium enterprises (SMEs) in the Eastern Cape,” in
Proceedings of the ISSA 2005 New Knowledge Today Conference, H.
S. Venter, J. H. P. Eloff, L. Labuschagne, and M. M. Eloff, Eds., 2005,
pp. 1–17.

[12] J. Coertze and R. Von Solms, “A model for information security
Springer, 2012,

governance in developing countries,” in AfriComm.
pp. 1–8.

[13] H. Koornhof, “A framework for IT governance in small businesses,”

Treatise, Nelson Mandela Metropolitan University, 2009.

[14] J. Coertze, “A framework for

information security governance
in SMMEs,” Master’s Dissertation, Nelson Mandela Metropolitan
University, 2012.

[15] K. Peffers, T. Tuunanen, M. Rothenberger, and S. Chatterjee, “A
design science research methodology for information systems research,”
Journal of Management Information Systems, vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 45–77,
2007.

[16] O. Hoppe, J. Van Niekerk, and R. Von Solms, “The effective
implementation of information security in organizations,” in Proceedings
of the IFIP TC11 17th International Conference on Information Security.
Visions and Perspectives. Deventer, The Netherlands: Kluwer, B.V.,
2002, pp. 1–18.

[17] C. Vermeulen and R. Von Solms, “The information security management
toolbox - taking the pain out of security management,” Information
Management & Computer Security, vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 119–125, 2002.
[18] R. Von Solms and S. Von Solms, “Information security governance: Due

care,” Computers & Security, vol. 25, no. 7, pp. 494–497, 2006.

[19] M. Gerber and R. Von Solms, “From risk analysis to security
requirements,” Computers & Security, vol. 20, no. 7, pp. 577–584, 2001.
[20] Y. Barlette and V. Fomin, “Exploring the suitability of IS security
management standards for SMEs,” in Proceedings of the 41st Annual
Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS 2008).
Ieee, 2008, pp. 308–308.

[21] ISO/IEC 27001,

-
Information security management systems - Requirements. Switzerland:
International Organization for Standardization (ISO), 2005.

Information technology: Security

techniques

[22] S. Bacik, Building an Effective Information Security Policy Architecture.

CRC Press, 2008.

[23] S. Posthumus, R. Von Solms, and M. King, “The board and IT
governance : The what, who and how,” South African Journal of Business
Management, vol. 41, no. 3, pp. 23–32, 2010.

[24] InfoSec Institute, “ISO27002 security framework audit program
template,” 2012. [Online]. Available: http://resources.infosecinstitute.
com/iso27002-template/

[25] L. Megginson, M. Byrd,

and W. Megginson, Small business
management: an entrepreneur’s guidebook, 5th ed. New York, USA:
McGraw-Hill/Irwin, 2006.

[26] J. Devos, H. Landeghem, and D. Deschoolmeester, “Rethinking IT
governance for SMEs,” Industrial Management & Data Systems, vol.
112, no. 2, pp. 206–223, 2012.

[27] ISO/IEC 38500, Corporate governance of
Organization for Standardization (ISO), 2008.

IT.

International

[28] J. Coertze, J. Van Niekerk, and R. Von Solms, “A web-based information
in
IEEE,

security management
Southern Africa,” in Information Security for South Africa.
2011, pp. 1–8.

small-to-medium enterprises

toolbox for

