Analysing the fairness of trust-based Mobile Ad Hoc 

Network protocols 

Comparing the fairness of AODV and TAODV protocols in scenario driven simulations 

Ivan Daniel Burke 

Renier van Heerden 

Martin S Olivier 

Department of Computer Science 

University of Pretoria 
Pretoria, South Africa 

iburke@csir.co.za 

 

Command, Control and Information 
Warfare, Defence, Peace, Safety and 

Council for Scientific and Industrial 

Security 

Research 

Pretoria, South Africa 
rvanheerden@csir.co.za 

Department of Computer Science 

University of Pretoria 
Pretoria, South Africa 
moliver@cs.up.ac.za  

 

 

Abstract— A Mobile Ad hoc Network (MANET) consists out of a 
collection  of  mobile  nodes  capable  of  sending  and/or  receiving 
wireless  communications.  MANETs  are  generally  unstructured 
networks  with  no  centralized  administration.  MANETs  use 
routing  algorithms  to  establish  routes  among  nodes.    This 
unstructured  nature  presents  the  opportunity  for  misbehaviour 
among nodes. 

Trust  based  MANET  routing  protocols  have  been  developed  to 
counteract malicious behaviour, in an effort to establish fair node 
behaviour.  Recent  research  has  shown  that  the  trust  protocols 
themselves introduce unfair behaviour among nodes. 

This  paper  presents  basic  MANET  scenarios  and  monitors  the 
fairness of TAODV and TEA-AODV routing protocols.  

Keyword: MANET; fairness; TAODV; TEA-AODV 

I. 

 INTRODUCTION. 

A  Mobile  Ad  hoc  Network  (MANET)  consists  out  of  a 
collection of mobile nodes capable of sending and/or receiving 
wireless  communications  [1].  Each  node  within  the  network 
acts  either  as  a  sender,  receiver  or  intermediate  node  during 
transmission  [2].  This  eliminates  the  need  for  centralised 
administration.  This open nature of MANET communications 
makes  it  an  attractive  option  for  military  and  peace  relief 
operations  where  pre-existing 
infrastructures  are  either 
damaged or none existent [1]. 

The  lack  of  centralised  administration  makes  MANETs  a 
target  for  network  attacks  and  node  misbehaviour  [3].  Each 
node  has  limited  resources  and  by  acting  selfishly  they  can 
optimise  their  gain  at  the  cost  of  the  other  network  nodes, 
resulting  in  an  iterative  Prisoner’s  dilemma  [4].  Trust  based 
protocols have been introduced to counter node misbehaviour 
[5],  [6],  [7].  These  trust  based  protocols  negatively  influence 
the Quality of Service within the network [8]. Recent research 
has shown that edge nodes within MANETs tend to be unfairly 
penalized by these trust algorithms due to their typographical 
location within the network [5], [8]. 

In  this  paper,  a  scenario-based  analysis  is  performed 
between Trusted Ad hoc On Demand Distance Vector Routing 
(TAODV)  and  Trusted  Energy  Aware  Ad  hoc  On  Demand 
Distance  Vector  Routing  (TEA-AODV)  with  regard  to  fair 
treatment of trustworthy nodes.   

The remainder of the paper is structured as follows: Section 
II  provides  a  motivation  for  the  need  of  fairness  within 
MANET networks. Section III, takes a look at related protocols 
and  proposed  addendums  to  existing  protocols.  Section  IV 
describes the criteria for evaluating fairness within the context 
of this paper. Section V describes the results of each protocol 
selected for evaluation, the paper concludes in Section VI. 

II.  MOTIVATION. 

Reference  [10]  describes  different  levels  of  a  computer 
network  user’s  needs  with  a  pyramid,  based  on  Maslow’s 
Pyramid  of  basic  human  needs  [11].  Fig.  1  illustrates  their 
model. 

 
Figure 1 Pyramid of user's needs in computer networks. 

 

At the bottom and most basic level, basic data delivery is 
all  that  is  required.  A  simple  example  of  this  would  be  the 
delivery of email. On the second level, advance data delivery is 
required.  This  means  that  basic  two-way  communication  is 
possible,  for  example  the  interaction  with  the  WWW,  where 
data  is  received  and  transmitted  among  participating  agents. 
The third level, introduces quality of service, this includes real-
time  streaming  of  video  and  audio  data.  The  final  level  is  a 

more specialized level which not only provides the service at 
the  required  quality  levels  but  also  requires  each  user  of  the 
application  equal  opportunity  to  the  application  resources. 
Examples of these type of systems would be e-trade, e-voting 
and large scale online gaming. 

The  work  done  in  [10]  states  that  the  bottom  three  levels 
serve as prerequisite for fair network behaviour as it is forms 
the  basis  for  data  communications.  Their  paper  further 
introduces  several  mechanisms  to  monitor  misbehaviour  and 
award fair network usage. 

Within  wireless  networks  the  problem  is  slightly  more 
complex.  Wireless networks are not only limited by the same 
fairness  constraints  of  physical  networks,  they  also  have  a 
limited  battery-life, 
limited  computing  power,  a  shared 
communication medium, connectivity issues and, in the case of 
MANETs,  they  also  have  no  centralized  control  within  the 
network to regulate and monitor data flow. 

In  the  work  done  by  [9],  it  can  be  seen  that  trust 
management can act as an incentive for fair agent behaviour in 
online  trade  systems.  Reference  [9]  describes  trust  as  an 
iterative prisoner’s dilemma, whereby agents receive improved 
payoffs if they collaborate. Reference [9] proves that by simply 
introducing  a  tit  for  tat  trust  system,  fairness  emerges  within 
the  online  trading  system.  Similarly  trust  can  be  used  by 
MANET  networks  which  operate  in  the  same  setting  of 
uncertainty and mistrust [5] [6] [7]. 

Reference [12] describes a mechanism used to determine an 
agent’s trustworthiness in a purely distributed system without 
the  aid  of  a  centralized  control.  Reference  [12]  builds  on  the 
work  done  earlier  by  [9]  in  attempting  to  illustrate  fairness 
emergence  through  trust  management.  Both  these  models  are 
based  on  online  trading  reputation  systems  and  the  author’s 
attempt  to  identify  misbehaving  agents  and  by  introducing  a 
new  reputation  algorithm  which  promotes  fair  behaviour 
among nodes. 

A  trustworthy  agent  might  not  just  be  mistreated  by 
misbehaving agents. According to [13] reputation management 
systems themselves can also be a barrier to fair agent treatment. 
In  [13],  six  problems  with  current  reputation  systems  where 
identified: 

  Equations  that  do  not  accurately  identify  the 

current reputation of agents. 

  Starting reputation is set too low, which acts as a 

barrier to new entries into the network. 

  There is no incentive to rate peers. 
  There is no ability to filter or search by reputation 

score. 

  Use of a single general reputation system. 
  Most systems have an unlimited memory. 

The  problems  identified  by  [13]  are  targeted  at  online 
trading  systems  specifically,  but  in  Section  V,  we  will  adapt 
these  problems  to  be  more  suited  for  MANET  networks.  By 
using  the  newly  formulated  problems,  we  will  evaluate  the 

performance  of  well  known  MANET  trust  based  protocols 
against these problems as criteria for fairness evaluation. 

In the next Section we review some related protocols and 

protocol addendums. 

III.  RELATED PROTOCOLS. 

It  has  been  suggested  that  Public  Key  Encryption  (PKI) 
could  solve  the  current  trust  issues  in  MANET  networks  as 
well  as  serve  as  a  mechanism  to  increase  trust  within  the 
network  [14]  [15]  [16].  Reference  [17]  produced  a  report 
comparing  cryptographic  MANET  protocols  to  trust  based 
protocols. Based on the report, cryptographic techniques often 
require  a  third  party  certificate  authoring  and  authentication 
service  or  a  pre-deployment  sharing  of  public  keys.  This 
contradicts the ad hoc nature of MANET networks and limits 
the  application  of  the  network.  Furthermore  result  also 
indicated  that  secure  routing  requires  more  overhead  per-
packet.  Secure  Ad  hoc  On  Demand  Distance  Vector  Routing 
(SAODV)  had  2.125  times  more  per-packet  overhead  than 
Trust  based  AODV,  and  2.35  times  more  overhead  than 
standard  ADOV.  The  additional  overhead  caused  increased 
battery  usage  and  reduces  the  overall  lifespan  of  the  agent. 
Decreasing  agent  lifespan  might  lead  to  targeted  Denial  of 
Service (DoS) attacks. Hence higher security via cryptography 
might result in a higher risk of DoS attacks. Reference [18] and 
[19] describes cryptographic systems which are scaleable to the 
specific security versus risk of DoS trade-offs expected within 
the network. 

The remainder of the related protocols will be discussed use 
trust as the basis for security. The reason for this is primarily 
the  high  overhead  requirements  of  cryptographic  techniques 
and 
third  party  certificate  authoring 
mechanisms.  We  will  specifically  focus  on  the  two  trust 
algorithms that will be tested in Section V. 

their  reliance  on 

Trust based AODV, as proposed by [20], represents trust as 
subjective  logic.  According  to  subjective  logic  an  opinion  is 
comprised of a triplet that consist out of, Belief (b), Disbelief 
(d) and Uncertainty (u) as illustrated in Fig.2. 

 

Figure 2 : Opinion triangle 

 
(1) 
Equation (1) describe 

   

 

 

agent A’s subjective opinion of agent B as the sum of its belief, 
disbelief and uncertainty in B based on prior experience with 
B. 

 

 
 
(2) 
 
 

Equation (2) illustrates how each of the values, within the 
opinion equation is determined. Let p and n respectively be the 
positive  and  negative  evidence  collected  by  A  about  B’s 
trustworthiness. 

TEA-AODV  is  an  energy  aware  adaption  of  standard 
TAODV implementation, proposed by [22]. TAODV does not 
consider the energy level of agents within the MANET when 
judging an agent’s trustworthiness. The battery life of an agent 
can  adversely  affect  its  capability  to  forward  packets,  as  a 
result  an  agent’s  trustworthiness  is  negatively  influenced.  
Reference  [22]  suggests  that,  by  introducing  a  mechanism  to 
combine energy levels and trustworthiness of a proposed route, 
in doing so they determine the reliability of the route. 

TEA-AODV  alters  the  way  in  which  trustworthiness  is 
measured  in  TAODV.  The  new  trust  scheme  is  based  on  the 
number of packets received or sent to neighbouring agents. An 
agent is classified as a stranger (S), if the agent has never sent 
or  received  any  packets  from  the  neighbouring  agents.  An 
agent is classified as an acquaintance (A), if the agent has sent 
or  received  a  few  packets  from  the  neighbouring  agent.  An 
agent  is  classified  as  a  friend  (F),  if  the  agent  has  sent  or 
received  many  packets  from  the  neighbouring  agent.  The 
protocol does not specify a specific quantitative value for each 
of the qualitative statements many and few. It does suggest that 
these values are determined by the length of agent association 
and the number of packets sent during the association interval. 
For the purposes of this paper these values will be determined 
as per Table II. 

 

 

Table II : trust estimation as defined by TEA-AODV 

Trust Level

Num. Packets / Transmission Interval (s)

Trust Value

Figure 3 : Multi-hop connection 

 

In the case of a multi-hop connection, as illustrated in Fig. 
3,  if  A  wants  to  communicate  to  C,  A  can  only  achieve  this 
connection by first connecting to B and having B forward the 
message on A’s behalf to C. A uses discounting combination, 
as defined by subjective logic [21], to combine its opinion of B 
with that of C, as illustrated in (3)  

 
 

 

(3) 

TAODV uses these triplets to make judgments about how it 
should respond to routing requests from various agents in the 
network.  Table  I,  depicts  the  judgement  criteria  used  in 
TAODV. 

Belief 

 

 

>0.5 
≤ 0.5 

Table I : Criteria for judging trustworthiness 
Disbelief 

Uncertainty 

Actions

 

>0.5 

 

≤ 0.5 

>0.5 

 
 

≤ 0.5 

Request and verify digital 

signature 

Distrust agent for an expire time
Trust agent and continue routing

Request and verify digital 

signature 

  
During initial start-up A has no opinion of B and initializes 

its trust values to (0, 0, 1) as per (1). 

F
A
S

>0.7 

≥ 0.3and ≤ 0.7 

<0.3 

0.7-1.0
0.3-0.7
0-0.3

 
TEA-AODV uses a second metric remaining battery power, 
to  determine  the  reliability  of  suggested  path.  The  power 
consumption  is  calculated  as  follows  within  TEA-AODV. 
Power  consumed  during  transmission  is  calculated  with  (4), 
with Pt, the power required to transmit a single packet, and T as 
the  transmission  time.  T  can  be  calculated  using  (5).  Power 
consumed  during  data  reception  can  be  calculated  similarly 
with (6), with Pr being the power required to receive a single 
packet. 

Consumed Energy During Transmission = Pt x T   (4) 
(5) 
T = Data size / Data rate 
Consumed Energy During Reception = Pr x T    
(6) 

 

 

 
By combining these metrics a Reliability relation is derived 
as per Table III. If the reliability of the route request is lower or 
equal to 0, the route request is discarded. In the case of a multi-
hop route, the reliability is determined by the sum of all agents 
within the route and divided by the number of hops taken, to 
form a combination reliability relationship. 

 

Table III : Reliability value for each agent 

Trust value  Remaining Energy % 

Reliability 

Reliability

value 

High 

Medium 

Low 

Very high 

Very, very high 

1.0 
0.8 
0.6 
0.4 
0.2 
0.0 

80-100 
80-100 
50-79 
50-79 
50-100 
0-49 

0.7-1.0 
0.4-0.6 
0.7-1.0 
0.4-0.6 
0.0-0.3 
N/A 
 
In this section we discussed some of the current trust based 
MANET protocols. TAODV and TEA-AODV, were discussed 
in greater details as their fairness will be evaluated in Section 
V. The reason for specifically using these algorithms is because 
they rely purely on trust as the basis for secure communication. 
In the following Section, we discuss the criteria for constituting 
fair agent behaviour. 

Very low 

data  transfer  as  the  most  basic  need  of  computer  networks. 
Based on the urgency of a message it may, in certain scenarios, 
be  acceptable  to  send  data  via  a  less  trustworthy  route.  The 
routing protocol should be able to cater for such scenarios. 

E.  Use of a single general reputation system. 

MANET routing is a multi-dimensional problem. As such 
an  agent’s  trust  can  not  fairly  be  judged  by  a  single  metric, 
which does not reflect the full situation of the agent. 

F.  Unlimited memory.  

Trust based systems use the full transaction history as basis 
of  trustworthiness.  Reference  [4],  [9]  and  [12],  identified 
scenarios  where  agents  would  only  misbehave  for  a  small 
subset  of  transactions,  but  due  to  the  reputation  system’s 
unlimited memory of transactions the average reputation would 
still  reflect  as  trustworthy.  Conversely  if  an  agent  seemingly 
misbehaved  during 
remain 
accountable for these failed transactions for the remainder of its 
communications. 

interaction, 

it  will 

initial 

IV.  EVALUATION CRITERIA. 

identified  with  online 

In  Section  II,  we  discussed  some  of  the  motivation  for 
fairness  in  trust  based  reputation  systems.  Specifically  we 
mentioned  [13]’s  problems 
trade 
systems.  In  this  section  we  elaborate  on  these  problems  and 
tailor them to better fit the MANET domain. We also identify 
additional  problems  with  trust  based  systems  specific  to  the 
MANET domain. After describing each problem we propose a 
scenario  based  test  to  evaluate  each  trust  based  protocols 
performance against each problem identified.  

A.  Equations that do not accurately trustworthiness. 

Due to the nature of wireless networks, connections are not 
always  stable,  they  are  affected  by  topology,  geographic 
barriers, signal strength and temporal events [1], [3], [7], [19], 
[20].  Hence,  it  is  fairly  difficult  to  accurately  measure 
misbehaviour  if  all  of  these  parameters  are  not  taken  into 
account. 

B.  Starting reputation is too low and may act as a barrier to 

new agents. 
In most trust based reputation systems, agents start with an 
initial  trust  value  of  0  [4],  [9],  [10],  [13],  [22].This  makes  it 
difficult to improve gain trust if the agent is never permitted to 
engage in the network communications due to low trust.  

C.  No incentive to rate peers. 

By  transmitting  one’s  opinion  about  neighbouring  agents, 
limits  ones  own  resources  such  as  battery  power  and  time  to 
transmit. It would be better for agents to not advertise routing 
or trust information at the cost of their own battery power. 

D.  Inability to filter by reputation. 

In Mobile networks there may be scenarios whereby there 
is only a single routing path. Trust based systems must strive to 
always use the most trusted path available, [10] describes basic 

To  evaluate  the  fairness  based  on  the  aforementioned 
criteria, three  scenarios will  now be described to test each of 
the protocols. The agents are simulated in NS-2.34. The agent 
setup can be seen in Table IV. Each scenario is simplistic and 
tries to determine the root cause of unfair treatment; hence we 
will simulate specific agent interactions without the clutter of a 
complex network setup. 
Antenna model
Propagation model
Transmission range at full battery power 
Distance between agents
Source packet rate
Source data packet size
Initial battery power
Transmission power consumption 
Receiving power consumption 
 

Omni Directional
Two Ray Ground
200 m
180 m
4 packets/s
512 bytes
3.6 Watts
280 mA
180 mA

Scenario  1  –  Two  agents  will  be  placed  within 
communication  range  of  each  other,  as  illustrated  by  Fig.  4. 
The agents will start continuous communication at t = 0s. All 
agents in this scenario act completely trustworthy to the best of 
its capabilities. The scenario will continue to run until one of 
the agents run out of battery power. The goal of this scenario is 
to  show  the  initial  ramp  up  time  of  each  protocol  as  well  as 
illustrate  how  they  respond  to  ever  decreasing  transmission 
strength. 

V.  PROTOCOL EVALUATION 

In  this  section  each  protocol  will  be  run  in  each  of  the 
scenarios discussed in the previous section. The results will be 
presented  and  analysed  according  to  the  criteria  specified  in 
Section IV. 

A.  TAODV 

1)  Scenario 1 
Fig. 7, depicts agent A’s opinion of agent B in scenario 1, 
using  TAODV.  Table  IV,  compares  the  probability  of 
packet delivery to the current belief in agent B. 

Figure 4 : Scenario 1 

Scenario  2  – Three  agents,  A,  B  and  C  are  placed  within 
communication range, as illustrated in Fig. 5. At t = 60s a new 
agent, D, is introduced to the system. 

 

 

Figure 5 : Scenario 2 

the 

system,  except  D, 

 All  agents  within 

start 
communicating  randomly  to  each  other  during  the  execution 
run, starting at t = 0s. At t = 60s, agent D joins the network, it 
does not transmit its own data but acts as a new source to route 
data  from  A  to  C.  All  agents  in  this  scenario  act  completely 
trustworthy  to  the  best  of  its  capabilities.  The  goal  with  this 
scenario is to demonstrate the capability for a new agent to join 
the network. 

Scenario  3  –  Two  agents  will  be  placed  within 
communication  range  of  each  other,  as  illustrated  by  Fig.  6. 
The  agents  will  start  continuous  communication  at  t  =  0s.  In 
this scenario agent B has a 10% probability to misbehave. The 
scenario will continue to run until one of the agents run out of 
battery power. The goal of this experiment is to test how long it 
takes for the protocol to detect a partially misbehaving node. 

 

Figure 6 : Scenario 3 

Each of these scenarios addresses a different aspect of the 
fairness of trust algorithm problem. In the next section we will 
evaluate the performance of TAODV and TEA-AODV in each 
of these scenarios. 

It  should  be  noted  that  these  scenarios  are  rather  basic  in 
their  design  yet  they  are  specifically  designed  to  evaluate 
certain conditions within the MANET network. The results we 
aim  to  achieve  by  creating  such  basic  scenarios  often  get 
obfuscated within very large simulations. 

Figure 7 : Agent A's opinion of B in Scenario 1 using TAODV 

 

Table IV : TAODV- Packet delivery Probability versus Agent Belief 
Time (t) 

Packet delivery probability 

Belief value 

 

1 
153 
298 
443 
601 

1.00 
0.75 
0.50 
0.25 
0.0 

 

0.333 
0.901 
0.788 
0.689 
0.536 

As can be seen by Table IV, at initial packet transfer, t = 1s, 
agent A’s opinion of B is lower than the required threshold of 
0.5  to  be  trusted.  According  to  Table  1,  because  the 
uncertainty level is greater than 0.5 the packet is not rejected 
but both agents are requested to verify their digital signatures. 
Within  the  first  3  packet  transfers  agent  A’s  opinion  of  B 
becomes  high  enough  to  classify  it  as  trustworthy  and 
continues communication as normal. At t = 601s, both agents 
are at too low power to cover the communication distance of 
180 meters. At t = 601s, A still has more than a 50% trust in 
agent  B.  According  to  Table  VI,  A’s  opinion  of  B  does  not 
accurately  depict  the  true  probability  of  packet  delivery. 
Furthermore, A and B both act as honestly as possibly given 
their constraints, yet by purely judging the reputation values, it 
appears  as  if  B  acts  increasingly  dishonest.  This  is  due  to 
diminishing battery power and not due to any misbehaviour on 
B’s  part.  By  only  taking  successful  communications  into 
account  A  is  unaware  that  the  misbehaviour  is  due  to 
diminishing battery power and as a result may unfairly judge 
the behaviour of B.  

2)  Scenario 2 
Fig.  8  shows  the  results  of  scenario  2,  while  using  the 
TAODV  protocol.  Agent  D  is  only  introduced  at  t  =  60s. 
According  to  Table  V,  even  though  D  is  introduced  to  the 
network  at  t  =  60s,  it  is  not  chosen  as  the  routing  agent 

between A and C till, B has become untrustworthy, trust < 0.5, 
at  t  =  191s.At  t  =  60s,  in  a  fair  system  D  should  have  been 
selected  as  routing  agent  as  it  had  the  highest  probability  of 
successfully delivering the packet to C. Agent D was the more 
reliable routing option but was rejected by the trust algorithm 
due to the barrier of new entry. At t = 191s, D’s probability of 
delivering the data has been reduced to just 0.767 due to agent 
D  responding  to  route  requests  from  A,  which  drained  its 
battery  power.  This  decrease  in  probability  shows  the  price 
paid by D for acting trustworthy and advertising its ability to 
route the packets. 

Figure 9 : Agent A's opinion of B in Scenario 3 using TAODV 
 
B.  TEA-AODV 
1)  Scenario 1 
Fig.  10,  depicts  agent  A’s  opinion  of  B’s  reliability  in 
scenario  1.  Table  VI,  compares  the  probability  of  packet 
delivery to the current reliability rating of agent B. 

Figure 8 : Agent A's belief in B and D, in scenario 2 using TAODV 

 

0.0 
0.333 

Probability D 
1.0 
0.767 

Probability B  Belief in D 
0.833 
0.0 

Table V: Scenario 2 test results using TAODV 
Belief in B 
0.74 
0.494 

Time (t) 
60s 
191s 
 
3)  Scenario 3 
Fig.  9  shows  the  results  of  scenario  3,  while  using  the 
TAODV protocol. Agent B misbehaved 10% of the time yet it 
was only detected as misbehaving, belief < 0.5, at t = 533s. In 
scenario 1, agent A’s trust in agent B, which was acting 100% 
trustworthy,  was  only  evaluated  as  0.56 
trustworthy. 
According  to  these  finding  the  agents  opinion  of  B  was 
affected  more  by  the  loss  of  signal  strength  than  by  the 
deliberate misbehaviour of B. At t = 534s, the triplet is reset to 
(0,0,1)  as  per  protocol  specifications.  At  t  =  546s,  a  single 
packet  was  successfully  transmitted,  which  triggered  the 
sudden  spike  between  t  =  546s  and  t  =  549s.  This  solitary 
packet  transfer  was  quickly  deemed  untrustworthy  by  the 
algorithm  and  the  triplet  was  again  reset  to  (0,0,1),  where  it 
remained till the battery power was deemed too low to cover 
the transmission distance, at t = 603s. 

Figure 10 : Agent A's opinion of B in Scenario 1 using TEA-AODV 

Table VI - Packet delivery Probability versus Reliability 
Time (t) 

Packet delivery 

Reliability value 

probability 

1 
153 
307 
447 
507 

 

1 
0.75 
0.5 
0.25 
0.0 

0.2 
0.6 
0 
0 
0 

At t = 1s, the reliability of B is classified as Low, the battery 
power might be high but A views B as a stranger, due to the 
lack of prior knowledge. At t = 4s, B is classified as very, very 
highly reliable, due to high battery power and by having four 
successful  communications  without  misbehaving  B 
is 
classified  as  a  friendly  agent.  At  t  =  298s,  B  is  classified  as 
having very, low reliability, this is due to low battery power 
and  as  a  result  low  trust.  After  t  =  298s.  B  is  unable  to  re-
establish  connection  to  A,  due  to  TEA-AODV  protocol 
specifications. These specifications seem to be too strict, as at 
t = 298s, still had a probability of 0.48 of delivering the packet 
successfully, based on battery levels. 

2)  Scenario 2 
Fig.  11  shows  the  results  of  scenario  2,  while  using  the 
TEA-AODV protocol. Agent D is only introduced at t = 60s. 
According  to  Table  V,  even  though  D  is  introduced  to  the 
network  at  t  =  60s,  it  is  not  chosen  as  the  routing  agent 

 

 

between A and C till, B receives a reliability rating of low, at t 
=  101s.  This  adoption  time  is  significantly  less  than  that  of 
normal  TAODV.  At  t  =  101s,  D’s  only  had  a  probability  of 
0.924,  this  is  due  to  the  power  spent  advertising  its  routing 
capabilities.  Using  TEA-AODV,  D  was  also  negatively 
affected for rating is routing capability, but to a lesser extent 
than  standard  TAODV.  After  t  =  101s,  B  is  no  longer 
burdened  by  A  and  C’s  message  relays  and  can  use  its 
remaining power for sending its own messages in the network, 
A and C will use, the more reliable, agent D to route messages 
amongst each other. 

Figure 11 : Agent A's belief in B and D, in scenario 2 using TEA-AODV 

Table VII: Scenario 2 test results using TEA-AODV 

Time (t)  Reliability of B 

Probability B  Reliability of D 

Probability D 

60 
101 

0.6 
0.2 

0.71 
0.513 

0.2 
0.2 

1 

0.924 

 

 

3)  Scenario 3 
Fig.  12  shows  the  results  of  scenario  3,  while  using  the 
TEA-AODV protocol. In this scenario B misbehaves 10% of 
the time. Ironically, TEA-AODV rates the misbehaving agent 
with higher reliability than the trust worthy agent. This is due 
to  the  fact  that  by  misbehaving  slightly,  B  saves  a  lot  of 
battery power, and by using TEA-AODV’s weighting system 
B is viewed as more reliable because of this. By misbehaving, 
B  is  classified  as  having  very  low  reliability  at  t  =  379s,  as 
opposed to t = 298s when acting completely trustworthy. [22] 
did mention the possibility of adjusting the weighting system 
or adding an additional weight to counteract this behaviour in 
the future work section of their paper. 
  

Figure 12 : Agent A's opinion of B in Scenario 3 using TEA-AODV 

 

VI.  CONCLUSION 

In  this  paper  we  investigated  some  fairness  problems 
identified  in  online  reputation  system.  We  then  adapted  the 
problems to fit the domain of wireless networks; we used the 
adapted  problems  as  criteria  for  testing  the  fairness  of  two 
trust  based  routing  protocols,  namely  TAODV  and  TEA-
AODV. 

Our  results  showed  that  trust  based  protocols  can  treat 
agents  unfair  in  certain  scenarios.  In  extreme  cases  such  as 
scenario 3, using TEA-AODV, the trust based algorithm might 
even benefit a misbehaving agent. 
A.  Future work. 

 

Identify more scenarios which may lead to unfair treatment 
of agents. Focusing specifically on the layout of the network. 
Simulation of large networks tend to hide scenarios within the 
network, which contribute to unfair treatment of nodes, such is 
suggested by [23]. 

Adapt the TEA-AODV protocol, to work with quantitative 
data  rather  than  qualitative  data.  As  well  as,  testing  various 
weighting assignment applied to battery power versus trust. 

After  adjusting  the  protocols  for  enhanced  fairness  within 
these small isolated scenarios, we plan to test the scalability of 
the  problems  identified  by  increasing  the  network  size  and 
enhancing the realism of the scenarios. 

 

 

REFERENCES 

[1]  K. Balakrishnan, J. Deng and P. K.  Varshnet. “TWOACK: Preventing 
Selfishness in Mobile Ad Hoc Networks”,Wireless Communications and 
Networking Conference, IEEE, pp 2137-2142, Vol 4, 2005. 

[2]  B.  Wu,  J.  Chen,  J.  Wu.  and  M.  Cardei.  “A  Survey  of  Attacks  and 
Countermeasures  in  Mobile  Ad  Hoc  Networks”.  In  Signals  and 
Communication Technology. 1st ed. Springer USA. pp.103-35. 2007 

[3]  D. Umuhoza, J. I. Agbinya, C.W. Omlin. “Estimation of Trust Metrics 
for MANET Using QoS Parameter and Source Routing Algorithms” In 
Proceedings  AUSWIRELESS 
the  The  2nd 
International  Conference  on  Wireless  Broadband  and  Ultra  Wideband 
Communications, Washington, DC, 2007, pp 80-85 

'07:  Proceedings  of 

[4]  C.  Dellarocas  and  C.  A.  Wood.  “The  sound  of  silence  in  online 
feedback: Estimating trading risk in the presence of report bias”. Robert 
H. Smith School for Business, Leaders for the digital Economy, 2006 

[5]  H.  Miranda,  L.  Rodrigues.  “Preventing  selfishness  in  open  mobile  ad-

hoc networks”. 2000 

[6]  T. Ghosh, N. Pissinou and K. S. Makki. “Towards designing a trusted 
routing  solution  in  Mobile  Ad  hoc  Networks”,  Springer  Netherlands, 
vol. 10, pp 985-995. 2005. 
J.  Cho  and  A.  Swami.  “Towards  a  trust  based  cognative  network:  A 
survey  on  trust  management  for  Mobile  Ad  hoc  Networks”,  14th 
ICCRTS, “C2 and Agility”. 2009 

[7] 

[8]  Y.  Lin.  “QoS  issues  using  probabilistic  non-reputation  protocol  in 

Mobile Ad Hoc Network environment”, Unpublished 

[9]  A.  Wirzbicki.  “The  case  for  fairness  of  trust  management”,    ENTCS, 

vol. 197, Issue 2, pp. 73-89, 2008. 

[10]  R.  Denda,  A.  Branchs  and  W  Effelsberg.  “The  Fairness  Challenge  in 

Computer networks”,  LNCS, vol. 1922, pp. 208-220, 2000. 

[11]  A  Maslow.  “Motivation  and  Personality”,  Harper  &  Row,  New  York, 

pp. 20-37, 1954. 

[12]  T. Kaszuba, K. Rzadca and A Wierzbicki. “Discovering the most trusted 
agents  without  centralized  control”,  Embedded  and  Unbiquitous 
Computing, EUC ’08, pp. 616-621. 2008. 

[13]  E.  A.  Malaga.  “Web-based  reputation  system  amanagement:  Problems 
and  suggested  solutions”,  Electronic  Commerce  Research,  Vol.  1, 
Number 4, pp. 403-417. 2001. 

[14]  M.  Wang,  L  Lamont,  P.  Mason  and  M  Gorlatova.  “An  effective 
intrusion  detection  approach  for  OLSR  MANET  Protocol”,  1st  IEEE 
ICNP Workshop on Secure Network Protocols, pp. 55-60. 2005. 

[15]  D.Glynos,  P.Kotzanikolaou,  C.  Douligeris.  “Preventing  Impression 
Attacks 
in  MANET  with  Multi-factorAuthentication”,  Third 
International Symposium on Modeling and Optimization in Mobile, Ad 
hoc, and Wireless Networks, pp.59-64. 2005. 

 

[16]  G. Hahn, D. Nyang, J. Song, J. Lee and B. Park. “Secure cluster based 
routing  protocol 
the  distributed  PKI  mechanism”. 
Proceedings  of  the  12th  IEEE  Mediterranean  Electronical  Conference, 
pp. 787-790. 2004.    

incorporating 

[17]  J. Cordasco and S. Wetzel. “Cryptographic vs. Trust-Based methods for 
MANET Routing Security”, DIMACS Technical Report, pp. 1-20. 2007. 
[18]  L. Eschenauer, V. Gligor and J. Baras. “On Trust Estimation in Mobile 
Ad-hoc Networks”, Technical report, MS 2002-10, Institute for research, 
University of Maryland, 2002. 

[19]  C.  Zouridaki,  B.  L.  Hejmo  and  R.  K.  Thomas.  “A  Quantitative  Trust 
Establishment  Framework  for  Reliable  Data  Packet    Delivery  in 
MANETs”, In proceedings of the 3rd ACM workshop on Security of Ad 
hoc and Sensor Networks (SASN ‘05), pp. 1-10, 2005. 

[20]  L.  Xiaoqi,  “TAODV:  A  Trust  based  AODV  Routing  Protocaol  for 

Mobile Ad Hoc Networks”. GiGi, pp. 57-83. 2004. 

[21]  A. Josang, “Artificila Reasoning with Subjective logic”, Proceedings of 
the Second Australian Workshop on Communication Reasoning, Perth, 
pp. 34-53, 1997. 

[22]  M.  Pushpalatha,  R.  Vankataraman  and  T.  Ramarao,  “Trust  Based 
Energy Aware Reliable Reactive Protocol in Mobile Ad Hoc Networks”, 
Enginering and technology, Vol. 56, pp. 16-19, 2009.  

[23]  Marias, G. F., Georgiadis, P., Flitzanis, D., Mandalas, K., “Cooperation 
enforcement 
survey,”  Wireless 
Communications  and  Mobile  Computing,  Vol  6,  Issue  3,  pages  319  – 
332, 2006. 

for  MANETs: 

schemes 

a 

 

