Assessing Information Security Culture: A Critical 

Analysis of Current Approaches 

Irene Okere 

The school of ICT 

Nelson Mandela Metropolitan University (NMMU) 

Port Elizabeth, 6031 

South Africa 

Email: Irene.Okere2@nmmu.ac.za 

 

 

 

Johan van Niekerk 
The school of ICT 

Nelson Mandela Metropolitan University (NNMU) 

Port Elizabeth, 6031 

South Africa 

Email: Johan.vanniekerk@nmmu.ac.za 

 

Mariana Carroll 

Deloitte & Touche 

Risk Advisory 

Woodlands, Docex 10 

South Africa 

Email: mcarroll@deloitte.co.za 

 

Abstract—  Today’s  businesses  operate  in  an  interconnected  and 
global  environment  allowing  them  to  collaborate  with  one 
another  and  share  information  resources.  At  the  same  time  this 
interconnectivity  exposes  the  organization  to  many  internal 
(employees)  and  external  threats.  Internal  threat  is  among  the 
top information security issues facing organizations as the human 
factor  is  regarded  the  weakest  link  in  the  security  chain.  To 
address  this  “human  factor”  researchers  have  suggested  the 
fostering of an information security culture to address the human 
behavior so that information security becomes a second nature to 
employees.  An  important  step  in  the  fostering  of  an  information 
security  culture  is  the  assessment  of  the  current  state  of  the 
culture.  This  paper  focuses  on  the  analysis  and  comparison  of 
current  information  security  culture  assessment  approaches,  to 
evaluate  their  suitability  specific  for  use  in  the  culture  change 
process. 

Keywords-  Information  security  culture,  assessment,  culture 

change 

I. 

INTRODUCTION 

Today’s  organizations  operate  in  a  global  environment. 
Globalization  enables  organizations  to  collaborate  and  share 
information resources  with  one another but also  exposes  them 
to  many  threats  both  within  and  from  outside  of  the 
organization.  Organizations  therefore  need  to  secure  their 
information resources. 

largely  at 

Humans  are 

the  center  of  protecting  an 
organization’s  information  resources  through  their  behavior 
when  interacting  with  information  and  information  systems. 
Through  the  formulation  of  information  security  policies, 
management requires employees to behave in a secure manner 
and  consequently  protect  information  resources.  However, 
employees  are  known  not  to  adhere  to  the  security  policies, 
leading to security breaches [1,2]. 

To  mitigate  the  risk  posed  by  the  non-adherence  of 
factor”), 
employees 
researchers suggest the fostering or development of a culture of 
information security (information security culture) [3-5]. 

to  security  policies 

(the  “human 

The first step in the development of an information security 
culture is the assessment of the current state of the culture [6].  
According  to  Schlienger  &  Teufel  [7,8],  there  is  no  unique 
toolset  and  method  for  studying  information  security  culture 
with  regards  to  what  to  assess  and  how  to  assess  information 
security  culture.  The  problem  therefore  exists  that  there  is  no 
published  widely  accepted  and  consolidated  approach  that 
indicates  how  the  assessment  of  information  security  culture 
should  be  done  and  researchers  have  called  for  more  research 
in this area [7-9]. 

 This  paper  focuses  on  the  analysis  and  comparison  of 
current  approaches  to  the  assessment  of  information  security 
culture in order to ascertain their suitability specific for use in 
the  culture  change  process.  The  remainder  of  this  paper  will 
briefly  describe  the  methodology  used  (section  II);  introduce 
the  concept  of  an  information  security  culture  (section  III); 
examine the process for fostering such a culture and discuss the 
role culture assessment plays in the fostering and management 
of  an  information  security  culture  (section  IV);  critically 
evaluate and compare current approaches to the assessment of 
an information security culture (Section V); and finally discuss 
the  outcome  of  section  V  (section  VI).  Section  VII  concludes 
this paper by proposing the use of an audit framework for the 
assessment of information security culture. 

II.  METHODOLOGY 

This  research  performs  a  critical  analysis  on  current 
(existing)  information  security  culture  assessment  approaches 
through  a  combination  of  literature  reviews  and  qualitative 
content analysis techniques.  

Qualitative  content  analysis  is  a  “research  method  for  the 
subjective  interpretation  of  content  of  text  data  through  the 
systematic  classification  process  of  coding  and  identifying 
themes  or  patterns”  [10].  The  analysis  was  conducted 
according  to  guidelines  provided  by  Krippendorff  [11].  A 
literature  study  was  conducted  and  a  number  of  research 
projects  that  focus  on  the  assessment  of  information  security 
culture  were  identified.  The  main  idea  of  each  article  under 
review  was 
the  article’s  strengths  and 
weaknesses  were  analyzed.  Qualitative  content  analysis  was 
done  on  the  identified  research  based  on  the  following  broad 
thematic areas: 

identified  and 

  Did  the  researchers  assess  the  following  levels  of 
information security culture: artifacts, espoused values, 
shared  tacit  assumptions  and  information  security 
knowledge? 

  What  assessment  methods  were  used  to  assess  which 

level of information security culture? 

  Did 

the  researchers  use  an 

integrated  approach 
incorporating all levels of information security culture? 

The  results  from  the  critical  analysis,  based  on  these  three 
thematic  areas  are  discussed  in  section  V  and  VI  as  the 
outcome of this paper. 

III. 

INFORMATION SECURITY CULTURE 

Security  does  not  lie  only  in  firewalls,  passwords  and 
awareness  training  but  also  in  a  culture  that  views  and  thinks 
correctly  about  information  security  issues.  A  culture  of 
information  security  needs 
the 
organizational  culture,  to  allow  them  to  view  and  think 
correctly about information security problems [12]. 

to  be  embedded 

into 

security 

culture 

a 

is 

Information 

subculture  of 
organizational culture [7]. It is mostly described using Schein’s 
model of organizational culture which is widely accepted in the 
field  of  information  security  [7,  8].  According  to  Schein  [14] 
organizational culture is “a pattern of shared tacit assumptions 
that was learned by a group as it solved its problems of external 
adaptation  and  internal  integration,  that  has  worked  well 
enough  to  be  considered  valid  and,  therefore,  to  be  taught  to 
new members as the correct way to perceive, think, and feel in 
relation  to  those  problems”.  Schein  describes  culture  as 
existing  in  three  levels:  artifacts,  espoused  values  and  shared 
tacit  assumptions.  This  definition  however  is  not  specific  to 
information security despite being widely accepted as a general 
organizational  culture  definition  hence  the  enhancement  by 
Van Niekerk & Von Solms [15]. 

Van  Niekerk  &  Von  Solms  [15]  describes  information 
security  culture  by  adapting  Schein’s  model  and  adding  a 
fourth  level,  information  security    knowledge  which  supports 
the  other  three  levels.  Information  security  knowledge  is 
necessary if employees are to behave in a secure  manner, as it 
cannot  be  assumed  that  the  employees  possess  such  security 
knowledge. The four levels of information security culture are 
described below. 

  Artifacts:  This  is  the  visible  layer,  referred  to  as  the 
surface  manifestation of  culture  [13].  Artifacts  are the 

things  that  are  observed  in  an  organization  [14]  and 
refer  to  visible  and  measurable  everyday  behavior  in 
the  organization 
include  behavior 
patterns,  security  handbooks,  awareness  courses, 
language  and  technology.  This  level  though  visible  is 
hard  to  interpret  without  questioning  the  “insiders”  of 
the organization. 

[3].  Artifacts 

  Espoused  values:  This  layer  is  partially  visible  and 
unspoken  but  can  shape  the  behavior  of  employees 
[13]. Espoused values represent the “reasons” given by 
insiders  of  an  organization  regarding  the  observed 
artifacts  [14].  The  espoused  values  of  an  organization 
include  strategies,  goals,  philosophies  and  other 
documents  that  describe  the  values,  principles  and 
vision of the organization [14]. 

 

 

Shared  tacit  assumptions:  Shared  tacit  assumptions 
usually form in organizations that have been successful 
where  the  success  can  be  attributed  to  the  values, 
beliefs  and  assumptions  of  the  founders  of  the 
organization  [14].  If  the  organization  continues  to  be 
successful,  the  beliefs  and  values  become  shared  and 
taken 
for  granted  and 
the 
organization’s culture [16]. 

the  core  of 

form 

Information  security  knowledge:  This  level  supports 
the  other  three  levels:  1)  artifacts  (employees  need  to 
have adequate information security knowledge of how 
to carry out their job functions in a secure manner), 2) 
espoused  values (the relevant employees  need  to  have 
sufficient  information  security  knowledge  to  know 
what  to  incorporate  into  a  policy  document  for 
example,  to  ensure  that  it  adequately  addresses  the 
security needs of the organization), and 3) shared tacit 
assumptions (if an employee’s beliefs conflicts with an 
espoused  value  for  example,  not  knowing  why  a 
specific  control  is  required,  the  employee  might 
knowingly  disregard  the  security  control).  Knowledge 
could thus help in ensuring compliance [8]. 

IV. 

THE ROLE OF ASSESSMENT IN CULTURE CHANGE 

According to Cameron & Quinn [17] change is a given and 
organizations are subject to change in order to survive. Change 
in  an  organization  needs  to  be  properly  managed  to  avoid 
failure. This failure can sometimes be attributed to the neglect 
of  organizational  culture.  Organizations  therefore  need  to 
manage the change process at the cultural level [17]. 

Schein  [16]  proposes  a  structured  change  management 
process  to  facilitate  culture  change  in  the  organization. 
Successful culture change needs to start with support from top 
management  [18].  Fig.  1  illustrates  a  culture  change  process 
adapted  from  Van  Niekerk  &  Von  Solms  [3]  and is described 
below. 

 

Step 1: Top management support and commitment 

Management  needs  to  understand  the  existing  culture 
(current  state),  the  need  for  change  and  the  idea  of 
change usually in response to a “business problem”. 

 

 

Step 2: Define the specific business problem 

 

to 

the  gap  between 

the  preferred  state 

This  entails  assessing  the  current  state  of  culture, 
defining  the  preferred  future  state  of  culture  and 
analyzing 
the  current  and  the 
preferred  state.  The  steps  needed  to  move  from  the 
current  state 
follows  a 
transformative  change  management  process  [16]. 
According  to  Schein  [14]  such  a  transformative 
process  involves  three  stages:  1)  unfreezing  (creating 
motivation  for  change  through  disconfirmation  and 
psychological  safety),  2)  learning  new  concepts  and 
new  meanings  for  old  concepts  through  imitation  of 
and  identification  with  role  models,  3)  refreezing 
(internalizing  the  new  concepts  and  new  meanings). 
O’Donovan  [18]  suggests  using  “culture  embedding 
mechanisms” like modeling, teaching and coaching by 
leaders to internalize the new way of doing things into 
everyday practices. 

  Step 3: Develop strategic action plan  

that  need 

Strategic  action  plans  include:  Identifying  actions  and 
behaviors 
to  be  started,  stopped  or 
encouraged  towards  achieving  the  kind  of  behavior 
the  desired  culture;  evaluating 
that  aligns  with 
employees’  readiness  for  change;  educating 
the 
employees  regarding  the  culture  change  to  minimize 
resistance; motivating the employees; generating social 
support by involving those affected by the change and 
identifying  champions  who  can  influence  others  and 
act  as  role  models;  providing  constant  and  extensive 
information  to  increase  employees’  understanding and 
commitment to  minimize confusion and resistance and 
to prepare them for the effects of the change. 

  Step 4: Create a cultural fit 

Creating  a  cultural  fit 
through  mechanisms  like 
education  and  training,  appraisal  and  reward  systems 
helps  to ensure  that  the changes  last.  O’Donovan  [18] 
refers 
“embedding 
mechanisms”. 

such  mechanisms 

as 

to 

  Step 5: Develop and choose a change leader team 

This  is  necessary  to  facilitate  the  change.  The  leaders 
need to be committed, competent and have a common 
purpose. 

  Step 6: Create small wins 

It is  important  to  identify  key  action  steps  that  can  be 
executed  to  generate  momentum.  Such  small  actions 
must  be  aligned  to  the  desired  culture  change  for 
motivation of employees. 

  Step 7: Identify metrics, measures and milestones 

It is important to identify measures for success, metrics 
of the main indicators and milestones to track progress 
of the change. As the change process progresses it may 
be necessary to reassess the current state following the 
results emanating from tracking the change process. 

Fig.  1  Framework  for  culture  change  adapted  from Van  Niekerk  &  Von 
Solms [3] 

 

 

  Step 8: Feedback and review 

The  organizational  environment  changes  frequently 
due  to  internal  and  external  factors  and  so  does  the 
organization’s needs. It therefore becomes necessary to 
periodically  review  and  refine  the  entire  information 
security  culture  management  process.  The  feedback 
and  review  can  necessitate  the  reassessment  of  the 
current state of information security culture in order to 
ensure  that  the  organization’s  information  security 
culture is continuously managed and the organization’s 
security needs are met. 

Assessment  plays  an  important  role  in  the  culture  change 
process, as illustrated in the eight-step culture change process. 
Culture  is  a  complex,  extensive  and  multifaceted  concept  that 
needs to be analyzed and assessed at each level in order for it to 
be understood [14]. The complexity of culture is implicated in 
the  mission,  vision,  strategy  and  goals  of  the  organization 
(external  survival  issues),  and  in  the  relationships  amongst 
people  in  the  organization  (internal  integration  issues).  These 
are also correlated to the broader national cultural assumptions 
arising from organizations becoming global.  

incorporating  more 

Culture  assessment  could  be  used  to  solve  a  business 
problem,  make  something  more  efficient,  or  to  achieve  a  new 
strategic  goal  possibly  arising  from  mergers,  joint  ventures  or 
partnerships 
than  one  culture  [14]. 
According  to  Schein  [14]  assessment  of  culture  plays  an 
important  role  in  culture  change.  It  helps  an  organization  to 
understand 
terms  of  strengths  and 
weaknesses and assist to make strategic choices. Consequently, 
culture assessment enables an organization to solve a problem, 
to  make  a  change  and  to  learn  something  new.  In  order  to  do 

its  own  culture 

in 

this,  an  organization  needs  to  know  how  the  culture  or 
subculture can help or deter it.  

forces 

include 

technology,  policies, 

According  to  O’Donovan  [18],  culture  change  exists  in 
response  to  internal  and  external  forces  in  the  environment. 
Internal 
leadership 
changes,  absenteeism,  and  rapid  staff  turnover  while  external 
forces 
include  political,  economic,  environmental  and 
regulatory  forces.  These  forces  can  necessitate  the  assessment 
of  culture.  For  example,  a  new  chief  executive  officer/chief 
security officer has a new security vision that could necessitate 
assessment of the information security culture to align with the 
new  security  vision.  As  explained,  one  of  the  reasons  for 
culture assessment is to solve a “business problem”. One such 
problem could be information security that necessitates culture 
assessment  in  order  to  identify  improvements  to  the  security 
policy.  Culture  assessment  could  also  arise  due 
to 
organizations  having  to  comply  with  regulatory  and/or  legal 
requirements  and/or  standards,  for  example 
the  health 
insurance  portability  and  accountability  act  of  1996  (HIPAA) 
which  deals  with 
the  protection  of  personal  healthcare 
information  either  stored  or  in  transit  within  or  outside  of  the 
organization  [12],  the  Sarbanes-Oxley  act  of  2002  which 
requires organizations to independently certify the adequacy of 
their internal controls [19],  and the ISO 27001 which stipulates 
the requirements for implementing security controls to meet the 
needs of every organization [20].  

the  organization’s 

implementing  solutions  and  addressing 

According  to  Martins  &  Eloff  [21]  assessment  in  culture 
change  can  also  help  to  ensure  that  recommendations  from 
previous  assessments  are  implemented.  Conducting  periodic 
assessments, 
the 
concerns  arising  from  previous  assessments  can  constantly 
improve 
information  security  culture. 
Culture  assessments  also  assist  an  organization  to  identify  the 
current  and  the  desired  information  security  culture,  the  areas 
that  need  the  most  attention,  and  improvements  needed  to 
achieve the desired information security culture [22].  Another 
reason  for  culture  assessment  is  to  help  an  organization 
understand  the  behavior of  its  employees  towards  information 
security  and  to  identify  key  issues  for  implementation  and 
integration 
the 
organization  [23].  Assessment  of  information  security  culture 
can also serve as a “wake-up” call for management depending 
on the results of the assessment and to take decisive action [6]. 

the  information  security  culture  of 

into 

Having highlighted the importance of assessment in culture 
change, it is  necessary  to discuss  approaches  that  can  be  used 
towards the assessment of information security culture.  

V. 

CURRENT ASSESSMENT APPROACHES  

From  the  literature  analysis  conducted,  a  number  of 
research  projects  were  identified  that  focus  on  the  assessment 
of  information  security  culture  in  an  organization,  namely 
Maynard,  Ruighaver  &  Chia;  Martins  &  Eloff;  Ngo,  Zhou, 
Chonka & Singh; Gerbrasilase & Lessa; Schlienger & Teufel; 
Finch, Furnell and Dowland; [9,21-25].  

Martins  and  Eloff  used  an  assessment  approach  consisting 
of  an  audit  process  and  including  an  information  security 
culture questionnaire for the assessment of information security 
culture  in  an  organization.  Ngo,  Zhou,  Chonka  &  Singh 

discussed  how  the  level  of  information  security  culture  in 
Australian  small  and  medium  enterprises  can  be  assessed. 
Gerbrasilase & Lessa used a descriptive survey method for the 
assessment of information security culture in Hawassa referral 
hospital.  Schlienger  &  Teufel  used  an  information  security 
culture  management  process  incorporating  a  combination  of 
methods  for  the  assessment  and  management  of  information 
security  culture  in  an organization.  Finch,  Furnell  & Dowland 
assessed  the  information  security  culture  by  targeting  the 
security attitudes and perceptions of system administrators and 
end-users to ascertain any disparity between both perspectives. 
Maynard,  Ruighaver  &  Chia  developed  a  research  model  for 
information  security  culture  which  can  be  used  to  assess  the 
quality of an organization’s information security culture.  

 This paper focuses only on the two assessment approaches 
that  describe  a  process  for  the  assessment  of  information 
security  culture  in  an  organization  namely  Martins  &  Eloff, 
Schlienger & Teufel [21,24]. Both assessment approaches will 
be  discussed  in  this  section  to  determine  their  suitability 
specific for use in the culture change process. 

A.  Martins and Eloff’s assessment approach  

Martins  &  Eloff  [26]  argue  that  employees’  behavior  and 
their interaction with computer systems play a major role in the 
security  of  information.  They  argue  that  employees  need  to 
display  an  acceptable  behavior  with  regards  to  information 
security which should translate to their everyday activity in the 
organization. 

in 

They 

culture. 

propose 

the  development  of 

The researchers suggest that organizational behavior needs 
the  desired 
to  be  considered 
organizational 
incorporating 
organizational  behavior  theory  in  order  to  instill  information 
security culture. This was done through the development of an 
information  security  culture  model  consisting  of  three  levels: 
organization,  group  and  individual.  They  identified  certain 
issues  at  each  level  that  could  promote  information  security 
culture  and  these  issues  (i.e.  policy  and  procedures,  risk 
analysis at the organization level, management and trust at the 
group  level,  awareness  and  ethical  conduct  at  the  individual 
level)  are  affected  by  change  agents,  namely  technology  or 
competition to achieve a certain information security culture. 

approach 
attitudes,  opinions 

To  determine  if  information  security  culture  is  at  an 
acceptable level in an organization, the researchers propose an 
assessment  approach  consisting  of  an  audit  process.  The 
employees’ 
assessment 
perceptions, 
towards 
information  security.  From  the  analysis  of  the  information 
gathered  throughout  the  audit,  organizations  can  address 
information  security  culture issues  at the three  different  levels 
(i.e.  organization,  group  and  individual).  The  audit  process 
consists of four phases: 

to  determine 

actions 

aims 

and 

  Phase  1:  Development  of  the  assessment  instrument 
instrument  was 

(questionnaire).  The  assessment 
validated for reliability and validity [27]. 

  Phase  2:  A  survey  process 

questionnaire 
organization’s 

the 
from  phase  one 
the 
information  security  culture.  The 

that  utilizes 
to  assess 

researchers propose this assessment to be a continuous 
process  in  order  to  promote  information  security 
culture in an organization. 

  Phase 3: Analysis of data obtained from phase two that 
the  status  of 

gives  a  quantitative 
information security culture in the organization. 

indication  of 

  Phase  4: 

Interpretations  and 

recommendations 
concerning  the  analyzed  data  from  phase  three.  This 
step  provides  feedback  to  the  organization  regarding 
their  information  security  culture  and  to  assist  the 
organization in addressing areas of concern. 

 

The  following  paragraphs  outline  Martins  and  Eloff’s 
assessment  approach  with  consideration  to  the  three  thematic 
areas outlined in section II. 

1)  Did  the  researchers  assess  the  following  levels  of 
information  security  culture  –  artifacts,  espoused 
values,  shared  tacit  assumptions  and  information 
security knowledge? 

  The researchers did not assess artifacts directly. 

security  culture  management  process  involves  four  stages: 
diagnosis, planning, implementation and evaluation: 

  Diagnosis:  This 

the 

stage 

existing 
analyzes 
identifies  any 
information  security  culture  and 
problems.  There  are 
to  analyzing 
information  security  culture.  The  first  is  what  to 
analyze  (the  assessment  items)  and  the  second  is  how 
to  analyze  (the  assessment  methods).  The  researchers 
propose  a  combination  of  assessment  items  and 
methods due to the difficulty in understanding culture.   

two  aspects 

  Planning:  This  stage  involves  two  aspects.  The  first 
aspect is strategic planning which involves defining the 
target or objective for the development of information 
security  culture  of  which  the  researchers  used  the 
information  security  policy  and  defining  the  market 
segments like employees, information technology staff 
and  managers  for  comparison  of  data.  The  second 
aspect  is  operative  planning  which  involves  internal 
communication  in  terms  of  awareness  programs, 
training, education and management buy-in in order to 
promote  the  security  awareness  of  employees  and 
managers. 

  The  researchers  did  not  assess  espoused  values 

 

directly. 

  The  researchers  focused  on  perceptions,  attitudes  and 
behavior.  It  is  therefore  inferred  that  they  assessed 
shared tacit assumptions. 

  They 

assessed 

security 

knowledge 

but 

not 

comprehensively [27]. 

2)  What  assessment  methods  were  used  to  assess  which 

level of information security culture? 

  No  assessment  method  was  used  to  assess  artifacts 

directly. 

  No  assessment  method  was  used  to  assess  espoused 

values directly. 

  A  questionnaire  was  used  to  assess  shared  tacit 

assumptions. 

  A  questionnaire  was  used 

to  assess  security 

knowledge. 

3)  Did  the  researchers  use  an  integrated  approach 
information  security 

levels  of 

incorporating  all 
culture in their assessment? 

  The researchers used an auditing approach but did not 
incorporate  all  the  levels  of  information  security 
culture in their assessment. 

B.  Schlienger and Teufel’s assessment approach 

According  to  the  researchers,  information  security  culture 
needs  to  be  maintained  and  modified  continuously  to  ensure 
that  it  meets  the  organization’s  targets  [8].  This  continuous 
process  of  analysis  and  change  referred  to  as  the  information 

Implementation:  This  stage 
involves  management 
commitment,  communication  with  all  employees, 
education and training for all employees, and employee 
commitment.  During  this  stage,  detailed  activities, 
responsibilities, resources, schedules and a budget need 
to be defined [24]. 

  Evaluation: This stage gives information regarding the 
implemented 

efficiency  and  effectiveness  of 
actions. 

the 

The  researchers  used  a  combination  of  methods  to  assess 
information  security  culture.  They  started  by  analyzing  the 
information  security  policy  in  order  to  understand  the  official 
values  (espoused  values)  and  the  interpretation  was  validated 
by  interviewing  the  chief  security  officer  (CSO).  Analysis  of 
the  security  policy  also  formed  part  of  the  assessment  of 
artifacts.  The  researchers  developed  a  questionnaire 
to 
determine  the  perceptions  and  attitudes  of  employees  (true 
values),  the  perceptions  and  attitudes  of  the  organization 
(official  values),  and  what  the  employee  thinks  should  be  the 
best  solution  for  each  question.  Unstructured  interviews  were 
conducted  with  the  CSO  and  a  technician  responsible  for 
security.  Firstly, 
interviews  were  conducted  before 
analyzing  the  security  policy  in  order  to  get  an  insight  of  the 
organization’s  information  security.  Secondly,  the  interviews 
were  conducted  after  analyzing  the  security  policy  in  order  to 
discuss and interpret the identified issues in preparation of the 
questionnaire.  Interviews  were  also  done  after  analyzing  the 
results  of  the  questionnaire  in  order  to  discuss  the  quality  of 
answers given by respondents. Observation was done as part of 
assessing artifacts by comparing the respondent’s answers with 
their behavior. 

the 

The  following  paragraphs  outline  Schlienger  and  Teufel’s 
assessment  approach  with  consideration  to  the  three  thematic 
areas outlined in section II. 

 

1)  Did  the  researchers  assess  the  following  levels  of 
information  security  culture  –  artifacts,  espoused 
values,  shared  tacit  assumptions  and  information 
security knowledge? 

  The  researchers  assessed  artifacts,  espoused  values, 
shared  tacit  assumptions  but  did  not  assess  security 
knowledge. 

2)  What assessment methods were used to assess which 

level of information security culture? 

  The  researchers  used  document  analysis,  interview 

and observation to assess artifacts. 

  To  assess  espoused  values  the  researchers  used 

document analysis, questionnaire and interviews. 

  They  used  a  questionnaire  to  assess  shared  tacit 

assumptions. 

3)  Did  the  researchers  use  an  integrated  approach 
information  security 

levels  of 

incorporating  all 
culture in their assessment? 

  The  researchers  used  an  integrated  approach  but  did 
not incorporate all  four levels of information security 
culture in their assessment.  

C.  Summary of limitations of the two assessment approaches 

According to Schein [14] culture should be assessed across 
all its levels. Neither of the assessment approaches assessed the 
four  levels  of  information  security  culture  as  described  in 
section III. 

Both assessment approaches used a questionnaire to assess 
shared  tacit  assumptions.    According  to  Schein  [9,  25]  a 
questionnaire or survey cannot be used to assess culture. This is 
because the dimensions of culture selected for assessment may 
not  be  important  in  relation  to  the  cultural  dynamics  of  that 
specific organization. Interviewing only the security personnel, 
as  done  by  Schlienger  &  Teufel,  may  not  reveal  the  problem 
the  organization  is  trying  to  solve  in  its  entirety.  This  will 
consequently  affect  what  questions  to  ask  and  what  questions 
to include in the questionnaire. In addition, the responses to the 
questionnaire  cannot  be  evaluated  to  determine  reliability  and 
validity especially with the promise of anonymity and privacy, 
and because  the respondents may  understand and  interpret the 
questions differently.  

According  to  Schein  [14]  other  issues  with  using  a 

questionnaire to assess culture include:  

  Questionnaires  do  not  reveal  the  interaction  and 

patterning in the cultures and subcultures. 

  Only  superficial  characteristics  of  the  culture  will  be 
assessed  because  survey  instruments  cannot  get  at  the 
deeper shared tacit assumptions that define the essence 
of cultures. 

 
 

  Due  to  the  tacit  nature  of  cultural  assumptions, 
respondents  of  questionnaires  will  not  be  able  to 
answer  the  survey  questions  reliably  since  there  is  no 
certainty  as  to  how  the  respondents  interpret  the 
questions. 

 

shared 

Inferring 
individual 
responses  is  very  ineffective  because  individuals 
perceive questions differently.  

assumptions 

from 

Schlienger & Teufel interviewed the CSO to get an insight 
of  the  organization’s  information  security  but  this  will  only 
provide  a  perspective  of  that  of  the  CSO  and  not  a  true 
reflection  of  the  entire  organization’s  information  security. 
Also by interviewing the security personnel after analyzing the 
questionnaire  results  does  not  give  the  interpretation  for  the 
respondents’  answers  but  rather  what  the  security  personnel 
thinks the respondents mean.  

Information  security  culture  should  be  assessed  across  all 
its underlying levels, namely artifacts, espoused values, shared 
tacit assumptions and information security knowledge. Table 1 
summarizes  how 
researchers  have  assessed 
information  security  culture  in  an  organization  against  the 
identified 
the  different 
researchers  assessed  the  four  levels  of  information  security 
culture, and the methods used in the assessment as well as the 
validity and reliability of the methods. 

thematic  areas, 

to  determine 

the  above 

if 

TABLE I.  

  RESEARCH APPROACH, ASSESSMENT ITEMS AND METHODS 

Assessment 

item 

Assessment 

method 

Research approach 

 

Martins and 

Schlienger and 

Document 

analysis 

Interview 

Artifacts 

Eloff 

None 

None 

Observation 

None 

Document 

analysis 

Espoused 

values 

Questionnaire 

None 

No direct 
assessment 

Interview 

None 

Teufel 

Analysis of 
information 

security policy 
Interview only 

with CSO 

Audit with no 
formal auditing 

guidelines or 

procedure 
Analysis of 
information 

security policy 
Questioning all 

level of 

employees 

Interview only 

with CSO 

Shared tacit 
assumptions 

Information 

security 

knowledge 

Questioning all 

Questioning all 

Questionnaire 

level of 

employees 

Interview 

None 

level of 

employees 

Interview only 

with CSO 

Questionnaire 

Few knowledge 

questions 

No direct 
assessment 

VI. 

DISCUSSION 

From section V it is evident that neither of the assessment 
approaches  analyzed  has  an  integrated  approach  for  assessing 
all  the  underlying  levels  of  information  security  culture  as 
described in section III.   

Schlienger  &  Teufel  [7]  focused  on  the  assessment  of 
artifacts, espoused values and shared tacit assumptions but not 
information  security  knowledge.  Audit-based  techniques  were 
used  only  in  the  assessment  of  artifacts.  However,  no  formal 
auditing guidelines or established auditing framework was used 
which  makes  it  difficult  for  the  exact  same  assessment  to  be 
replicated in another organization, or by other researchers.  

Martins  &  Eloff 

focused  mainly  on  shared 

tacit 
assumptions. 
Information  security  knowledge  was  not 
comprehensively assessed as acknowledged by the researchers 
[27].  Martins  &  Eloff  [21]  used  an  auditing  approach  in  their 
assessment  of  information  security  culture  but  also  did  not 
explicitly  state  that  formal  auditing  guidelines  or  framework 
was used.   

information  security  knowledge 

It  is  also  evident  from  section  V  that  shared  tacit 
assumptions  have  been  addressed  extensively  by  both 
assessment  approaches.  However,  the  assessment  of  artifacts, 
espoused  values  and 
is 
currently  lacking.  It  is  the  assertion  of  this  paper  that  formal 
auditing processes, as an integrated approach, can play a role in 
the  assessment  of  the  dimensions  of  information  security 
culture.  Part  of  the  assessment  of 
information  security 
knowledge  should  also  be  to  assess  the  level  of  employee 
knowledge. This can be included in security related educational 
programs  in  an  organization.  Assessment  of  information 
security  knowledge  should also  form  part of  the  audit process 
to ensure that employees are knowledgeable about information 
security.  This  is  an  important  recommendation  to  ensure 
responsibility for security violations.  

VII. 

CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 

This  paper  provided  a  critical  analysis  of  the  current 
approaches  used  in  the  assessment  of  information  security 
culture.  It  is  evident  that  the  current  approaches,  though 
thorough  in  some  aspects,  do  not  present  an  integrated 
approach  that  comprehensively  assesses  all  the  levels  of 
information  security  culture.    The  current  approaches  to  the 
assessment of information security culture utilize some form of 
auditing either as an assessment method or approach. However, 
none  have  followed  a  formal  auditing  approach  utilizing  an 
established audit framework so that the assessment process can 
be replicated in another organization. The development of such 
an audit framework for the assessment of  information security 
culture forms part of our future work in this area. 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 

The  financial  assistance  of  National  Research  Foundation 
(NRF) towards this research is hereby acknowledged. Opinions 
expressed  and  conclusions  arrived  at,  are  those  of  the  author 
and  are  not  necessarily  to  be  attributed  to  the  National 
Research Foundation. 

REFERENCES 

 

 [1] 

PWC, Information Security Breaches Survey 2010 technical report, 
2010. 

[2] 

[3] 

[4] 

[5] 

[6] 

[7] 

[8] 

[9] 

[10] 

[11] 

[12] 

[13] 

[14] 

[15] 

Computer Security Institute, 14th Annual CSI Computer Crime, 
2009. 

J. Van Niekerk and R. Von Solms, “An holistic framework for the 
fostering of an Information security sub-culture in organizations.,” 
ISSA, 2005. 

K. Thomson, R. Von Solms, and L. Louw, “Cultivating an 
organizational information security culture,” Computer Fraud & 
Security, vol. 2006, 2006, pp. 7 - 11. 

C. Vroom and R. Von Solms, “Towards information security 
behavioural compliance,” Computers & Security, vol. 23, May. 
2004, pp. 191-198. 

ISACA, “Creating a Culture of Security,” ISACA, 2011. 

T. Schlienger and S. Teufel, “Analyzing Information Security 
Culture : Increased Trust by an Appropriate Information Security 
Culture,” 14th International Workshop on Database and Expert 
Systems Applications, 2003. Proceedings., 2003. 

T. Schlienger and S. Teufel, “Information security culture – from 
analysis to change,” Proceedings of ISSA, 2003, pp. 183-195. 

S. Maynard, A. Ruighaver, and P. Chia, “Exploring Organisational 
Security Culture : Developing a comprehensive research model .,” 
IS ONE World Conference, USA, 2002, pp. 1-13. 

H.-fang Hsieh and S. Shannon, “Qualitative Health Research,” 
Health (San Francisco), vol. 15, 2005, pp. 1277-1288. 

K. Krippendorff, Conceptual foundation. In content analysis: An 
introduction to its methodology., Thousand oaks. CA. Sage, 2004. 

H. Tipton and M. Krause, Information Security Management 
Handbook, Auerbach Publications, 2007. 

A. Huczynski and D. Buchanan, Organizational Behaviour: An 
Introductory Text, FT Prentice Hall, 2007. 

E. Schein, The Corporate Culture Survival Guide, San Francisco: 
Jossey-Bass, 2009. 

J. Van Niekerk and R. Von Solms, “Information security culture: A 
management perspective,” Computers & Security, vol. 29, Jun. 
2010, pp. 476-486. 

[16] 

E. Schein, The corporate culture survival guide, Jossey-Bass, 1999. 

[17] 

[18] 

[19] 

[20] 

K. Cameron and R. Quinn, Diagnosing and changing 
organizational culture: Based on the competing values framework, 
Jossey-Bass, 2011. 

G. OʼDonovan, The corporate culture handbook: how to plan, 
implement and measure a successful culture change., the Liffey 
press, Ashbrook House, Ireland, 2006. 

H. Tipton and M. Krause, Information Security Management 
Handbook, Auerbach publications CRC Press LLC, 2008. 

ISO/IEC 27001, “Information technology — Security techniques — 
Information security management systems — Requirements,” 2005. 

[21] 

[22] 

[23] 

[24] 

[25] 

[26] 

[27] 

A. Martins and J. Eloff, “Assessing information security culture,” 
Information security of South Africa (ISSA), Johannesburg: 2002. 

L. Ngo, W. Zhou, A. Chonka, and J. Singh, “Assessing the Level of 
I.T. Security Culture Improvement : Results from Three Australian 
SMEs,” 35th Annual Conference of IEEE Industrial Electronics 
(IECON),, 2009, pp. 3189-3195. 

T. Gebrasilase and L. Lessa, “Information Security Culture in Public 
Hospitals: The Case of Hawassa Referral Hospital,” October, vol. 3, 
2011. 

T. Schlienger and S. Teufel, “Tool Supported Management of 
Information Security Culture,” Security and Privacy in the Age of 
Ubiquitous Computing, R. Sasaki, S. Qing, E. Okamoto, and H. 
Yoshiura, eds., Springer Boston, 2005, pp. 65-77. 

J. Finch, S. Furnell, and P. Dowland, “Assessing IT Security 
Culture: System Administrator and End-User Perspectives,” 
Proceedings of ISOneWorld 2003, 2003. 

A. Martins and J. Eloff, “Information security culture,” In Security 
in the information society. IFIP/SEC 2002, 2002. 

A. Da Veiga, N. Martins, and J. Eloff, “Information security culture 
– validation of an assessment instrument,” Southern African 
Business Review, vol. 11, 2007. 

[28] 

E. Schein, Organizational culture and leadership, Jossey-Bass, 
2004.  

 

