Challenges to Digital Forensics: 

A Survey of Researchers & Practitioners Attitudes and Opinions 

 

M. Al Fahdi, N.L. Clarke & S.M. Furnell 

Centre for Security, Communications & Network Research (CSCAN) 

Plymouth University, Drake Circus, Plymouth, United Kingdom 

info@cscan.org 

 
Abstract  –  Digital  forensics  have  become 

increasingly 
important  as  an  approach  to  investigate  cyber-  and  computer-
assisted  crime.  Whilst  many  tools  exist  and  much  research  is 
being  undertaken,  many  questions  exist  regarding  the  future  of 
the  domain.  Indeed,  prior  literature  has  widely  published  the 
challenges  that  exist  within  the  domain,  from  the  increasing 
volume  of  data  (e.g.  SANs,  hard  drive  capacities,  databases)  to 
the  varying  technology  platforms  and  systems  that  exist  (e.g. 
tablets,  mobile  phones,  embedded  systems,  cloud  computing). 
However, little effort has focused upon understanding the reality 
of  these  challenges.  The  paper  presents  research  that  seeks  to 
identify,  quantify  and  prioritise  these  challenges  so  that  future 
efforts can be concentrated on the issues that actually affect the 
domain.  The  study  undertook  a  survey  of  researchers  and 
practitioners  (both  law  enforcement  and  organisational)  to 
examine the real-challenges from the perceived challenges and to 
understand  what  effect  the  future  will  have  upon  the  digital 
forensic domain. A total of 42 participants undertook the study 
with  55%  having  3  or  more  years  of  of  experience.  45%  were 
academic  researchers,  16%  law  enforcement  and  31%  had  a 
forensic  role  within  an  organisation.  Overwhelmingly,  93%  of 
participants felt that the number and complexity of investigations 
would increase in the future. Apart from the plethora of findings 
elaborated in the paper, the principal future challenge priorities 
included  cloud  computing,  anti-forensics  and  encryption. 
Respondents  also  identified,  improving  communication  between 
researchers and practitioners and the need to develop approaches 
to  identify  and  extract  “significant data” through  techniques 
such as criminal profiling as essential.  Interestingly, participants 
did  not  feel  that  the  growth  in  privacy  enhancing  technologies 
nor legislation was a significant inhibitor to the future of digital 
forensics. 

Keywords  –  Digital  Forensics,  Forensic  Tools,  Cybercrime, 

Cybersecurity 

I. 

INTRODUCTION 

and 

electronic  media 

Digital  forensics  has  become  an  important  tool  in  the 
identification of computer-based and computer-assisted crime. 
They  are  ubiquitously  utilised  within  law  enforcement  to 
investigate 
increasingly  within 
organisations  as  part  of  their  incident  response  procedures. 
Whilst forensic tools, such as Guidance Software’s Encase [1] 
and AccessData’s FTK [2], have come a long way in the past 
15 years to incorporate a good range of forensic functionality, 
well-documented  challenges  exist  that  tools  have  yet  to  be 
fulfil.  Eric  Holder,  the  then  Deputy  Attorney  General  of  the 
United  States  Subcommittee  on  Criminal  Oversight  for  the 
Senate classified the challenges into three categories [3]: 

  Technical  challenges  –  e.g.  differing  media  formats, 
live 

steganography, 

anti-forensics, 

encryption, 
acquisition and analysis 

  Legal challenges – e.g. jurisdictional issues and a lack 

of standardised international legislation. 

  Resource challenges –e.g. volume of data, time taken 

to acquire and analyse forensic media 

Whilst  the  challenges  have  been  well  documented,  few 
studies  have  taken  place  to  better  understand  the  practical 
reality and relevance of those challenges [4-5]. Simply because 
a  challenge  exists,  does  not  necessarily  mean  it  is  either 
relevant or important for investigators to focus upon. In 2004, 
[6]  published  a  (limited)  study  investigating  the  top  5  issues 
facing  the  domain.  From  a  population  of  60  responses 
(including  academics,  students,  researchers  and  practitioners) 
the research found education/training, technologies, encryption, 
data acquisition and tools as the top 5. There were no further 
questions  asked  to  explore  other  aspects.  Unfortunately,  no 
further  studies  were  found  during  the  literature  review  stage 
that investigated end-user opinions and attitudes towards these 
challenges. 

The  purpose  of  this  paper  is  to  investigate  from  a 
stakeholder  perspective  what  they  feel  are  the  current  and 
future challenges within the digital forensic domain. Section 2 
presents the survey methodology and explains the development 
of the quantitative-based approach and survey tool. Section 3 
presents the survey results, including an analysis of researcher 
and practitioner perspectives. A discussion of the results in line 
with  current  literature  is  presented  in  Section  4,  prior  to  the 
conclusions and future work. 

II.  THE SURVEY METHODOLOGY 

A.  Purpose Of The Survey 

The  aim  of  the  survey  was  to  establish  and  prioritize  the 
key  future  challenges  that  are  posed  within  digital  forensics 
with an understanding of the differing perspectives of forensic 
practitioners and forensic researchers. It was felt the differing 
motivations of researchers, who typically look longer-term may 
differ from practitioners, who typically look near-term and thus 
this might have an impact upon what they consider to be the 
key  challenges.  To  assist  in  achieving  this,  the  following 
objectives were defined: 

  For  a  baseline,  understand  the  general  forensic 
background of participants – in order to appreciate the 
relevancy of responses 

  Understand  what  participants  feel  the  role  of  digital 
forensics is and to what extent it is currently able to 
meet that requirement 

  Understand  what  (if  any)  impact  changes  in  future 
technology  will  have  upon  forensic  investigations 
(from  both  a  law  enforcement  and  organizational 
perspective) 

  Examine  what  effect  the  evolving  nature  of  forensic 
capability  and  knowledge  will  have  upon  forensic 
practice  –  the  evolution  of  anti-forensic  techniques 
and  technologies  that  are  security  aware  and  reduce 
the  forensic  opportunity  (i.e.  The  operating  systems 
that forensically wipe files upon deletion). 

The format of the survey was kept simple yet effective so 
that there is an optimum balance between the time spent on the 
survey, the efforts required to complete it, while giving enough 
opportunity  for  the  participants  to  express  their  views  in  the 
most succinct and reasonable manner possible. To achieve this, 
a number of trial runs of the survey were undertaken by local 
researchers  in  the  domain  acting  as  participants.  From  the 
feedback  obtained, 
the  survey  was  further  refined  and 
optimised. The use of a Likert-scale was utilised extensively in 
order  to  maximise  the  information  provided  through  a 
quantitative  approach.  It  was  felt,  whilst  a  qualitative-based 
research  methodology  would  provide  a  richer  set  of  results, 
fewer  participants  would  be  willing  to  take  part.  As  such  a 
quantitative  approach  was  selected,  with  the  option  (in 
numerous  places)  for  the  participant  to  provide  further 
information. 

The  survey  was  published  online,  and  the  researcher 
shortlisted potential participants from the identified stakeholder 
total,  128 
communities  who  were  emailed  directly.  In 
invitations  were  sent  out  for  completion  amongst 
the 
international  community  (a  number  of  which  were  to  groups 
rather  than  individuals).  A  total  of  42  (split  between  19 
academic  researchers  and  23  practitioners)  completed  the 
survey and were subsequently analysed. Whilst this was not an 
overly large respondent level, given the highly targeted nature 
of  the  survey,  it  was  considered  not  an  unreasonable  sample 
size from which to proceed to analyse. 
III. 

SURVEY RESULTS 

The survey was divided into four sections: demographics, 
the  current  forensic  capabilities,  the  future  challenges  and 
legislative  concerns.  The  results  presented  initially  are  based 
upon  the  response  from  the  complete  population;  however, 
where appropriate, further analysis based upon the stakeholder 
perspectives of researchers and practitioners is presented. 
A.  Demographics 

An analysis of the demographics illustrates the respondents 
are  on  the  whole  well  educated  with  a  significant  level  of 
experience  –  both  in  terms  of  years  within  the  domain  and 
holding  relevant  professional  qualifications.  Of 
the  19 
researcher  responses  all  have  a  postgraduate  degree,  as  did 

48%  of 
the  practitioners.  Notably  however,  65%  of 
practitioners  also  had  one  or  more  relevant  professional 
qualifications – as would be expected due to the nature of the 
role.  Furthermore,  as  illustrated  in  Figure  1,  55%  of  the 
respondents  have  3  or  more  years  experience.  This 
demonstrates  the  respondent  population  is  a  relevant  and 
experienced  mix  of  academic  researchers  and  practitioners 
appropriate to provide informed opinions.  

Figure 1. Respondent Experience within the Domain 

 

B.  The Role of Digital Forensics and Current Tool 

this  section  was 

felt  about  digital 

Capabilities 
to  explore  how 
The  purpose  of 
respondents  currently 
forensics  and 
specifically with regards to what the current limitations were 
and  how  well  tools  are  able  to  provide  the  necessary 
functionality.  An  initial  question  asked  respondents  how 
important 
their 
background  and  expertise,  it  was  expected  that  the  response 
would  be  favorable  towards  it  being  important;  however,  it 
was  asked  to  explore  their  opinion  within  the  wider  context 
and 
later  responses.  The 
respondents overwhelming (98%) ranked it 4 or 5 out 5. 

they  felt  digital  forensics  was.  Given 

to  provide  a  comparison 

to 

The respondents were also asked to check what they feel 
were  key  limitations.  The  list  being  derived  from  an 
examination  of  literature  and  with  the  additional  option  of 
permitting  the  respondent  to  add  any  missing  limitations. 
Overall, the volume of data to be analyzed (74%) and the time 
taken  (67%)  are  considered  the  key  limitations,  with  the 
remaining  factors  obtaining  less  than  50%  of  the  response. 
Further analysis based upon the stakeholders perspectives (i.e. 
researcher and practitioner), as illustrated in Figure 2, show that 
proportionally  researchers  feel  there  are  a  greater  number  of 
limitations  than  their  practitioner  counterparts.  Whilst  they 
agree with the volume of data, more researchers felt the time 
taken  to  undertake  investigations  was  a  limiting  factor. 
Another  significant  difference  of  opinion  appears  with  the 
automation of forensic analyses – with double the proportion 
of researchers (63%) identifying it as a key limitation over the 
practitioners  (30%).  The  only  category  where  a  greater 
proportion of practitioners felt there was a limitation was the 
legal aspects. The reasons for this are unclear; however, it is 
likely practitioners have to contend with the legislative aspects 
in reality on a more regular basis than researchers and are thus 
subject to the difficulties. 

Figure 2. Principal Limitations to Investigations 

Figure 3. Current Tool Capability 

 

in  releasing  more 

interestingly,  7  of 

Further  examining  the  opinions  of  the  stakeholders, 
participants were asked if restricting or limiting investigations 
to cases of high importance could be a viable approach as it 
would  assist 
investigative  resources. 
Overall, only 9 of the 42 responses felt this would be a useful 
policy; 
those  responses  were  from 
practitioners. There are clear reasons why such a policy would 
be difficult to invoke in practice – how would one decide what 
was  important  until  after  the  investigation?  Furthermore, 
relying upon triage tools or automation alone could introduce 
an  unacceptable  level  of  error.  However,  it  is  clear  that  the 
volume  of  data  and  time  taken  results  in  investigations  is 
becoming  increasingly  and  prohibitively  expensive. With the 
explosion  of  data  and  technologies,  at  what  point  does  the 
traditional model of digital forensics become infeasible. 

An  analysis  of  current 

tool  capabilities  reveals  an 
interesting  perspective.  Overall,  the  consensus  is  that  tools 
reside  in  the  middle  of  spectrum  (neither  too  few  or  fit  for 
purpose) with a slight skew towards being more capable than 
not  (as  illustrated  in  Figure  3).  However,  exploring  capability 
based  upon  the  forensic  category  (e.g.  computer,  network, 
embedded  and  mobile)  suggests  an  order  to  the  capability, 
with computer forensic tools being largely fit for purpose and 
subsequent  categories  declining  in  capability,  in  the order  of 
mobile,  network  and  finally  embedded.  This  trend  arguably 
matches the market maturity, with computer and mobile-based 
tools being far more widespread. It is notably that few feel any 
of  the  tools  are  completely  fit  for  purpose.  A  further 
examination  based  upon  stakeholder  perspectives  reveals  the 
same  trend.  This  is  somewhat  contradictory,  as  it  might  be 
expected  that  researchers  (who  are  specifically  tasked  with 
developing  solutions  that  current  tools  do  not  have  the 
capability for and are therefore potentially more aware of the 
missing  capabilities)  would  have  resulted  in  the  selection  of 
poorer current capabilities. However, that was not the case. 

impact  upon 

software 

that  can  have  an 

concerned  with  were  malicious 

Participants  were  asked  a  series  of  questions  regarding 
how  concerned  they  were  with  respect  to  a  range  of 
technologies 
forensic 
investigations. As illustrated in Figure 4, on average all of the 
technologies were skewed towards being concerned, with over 
60% of respondents selecting 4 or 5 out of 5 in 5 out of the 7 
categories. The two categories that that respondents appeared 
less 
and 
steganography.  It  is  unclear  as  to  the  reasons  for  this  but 
perhaps  they  are  at  opposite  sides  of  the  same  spectrum  – 
investigators have been working with malicious software since 
the  inception  of  cybercrime,  and  therefore  are  comfortable 
with 
the  nature  of 
steganography,  its  rather  undetectable  nature,  it  is  not 
perceived  to  a  problem  because  it  (appears)  not  to  exist. 
Arguably  both  encryption  and  steganography  are  a  form  of 
anti-forensics;  however,  given  their  significance,  it  was 
deemed important to extract them and have them considered in 
their own right.  

technology.  Conversely,  given 

the 

Figure 4. Technologies that Cause Concern 

Upon asking respondents to rank the technologies, a slight 
difference  results  within  the  stakeholder  perspectives.  As 
illustrated in  Table 1, researchers feel that cloud computing is 
the single highest priority, whereas researchers feel it is third 
after  anti-forensics  and  encryption.  Whilst  both  stakeholders 
agree encryption is a key issue, they differ on the remaining 
priority  –  with 
the  pace  of 
technological change.  

researchers 

suggesting 

 

 

 

Table 1. Ranked Technologies that Cause Concern 

1 

Priority 

2 

3

Encryption = Pace of Technology 

Encryption 

Cloud 
Computing 

 

Researchers 

Practitioners 

Cloud 
Computing 
Anti-
Forensics 
Anti-
Forensics 

Cloud Computing  Encryption 

Overall 
 
To  provide  a  better  insight  into  the  experiences  of  the 
respondent  population  (as  this  will  likely  impact  upon  their 
responses),  participants  were  asked  on  how  frequently  they 
had  undertaken  investigations  involving  more  advanced  data 
hiding  techniques.  Of  those  to  whom  the  question  was 
applicable (i.e. had undertaken investigations) 66% responded 
that they had infrequently, with only 24% stating frequently. 
None  had  undertaken  them  on  a  very  frequent  basis.  Whilst 
digital 
forensic  challenges  are  well  understood  and 
documented, this finding suggests the impact of many of them 
has  not  yet  manifested  itself  practically.  This  would  suggest 
that whilst literature highlights the many technological issues 
that  exist  and  the  possible  opportunities  open  to  criminals, 
they  are  not  currently  utilizing  them.  Furthermore,  the 
resultant  issues  that  investigators  focus  upon  are  therefore 
those that have an immediate impact upon them. 

Finally, respondents were asked how they felt towards the 
use  of  open  source  utilities  and  tools.  Significantly,  69%  of 
respondents consider open source tools as an important or very 
important aspect of tool development. Given the rapid pace of 
technology, it will become increasingly difficult to rely upon 
commercial  vendors  to  provide  all  the  necessary  solutions, 
particularly in a timely manner. 
C.  The Future Challenges 

A  key  aspect  of  the  survey  was  to  focus  upon  the 
(perceived) future challenges to digital forensics, with a view 
of  enabling  researchers  to  priorities  them.  Respondents  were 
asked  a  couple  of  preliminary  questions  in  this  regard  – 
whether they felt the field of forensics would be more or less 
challenging,  whether  investigations  would  take  more  or  less 
time and whether investigations would be more sophisticated. 
Overwhelmingly,  93%  of  participants  felt  investigations 
would  be  more  challenging 
the  future  and  more 
sophisticated, with 67% also of the mind it would take more 
time.  Given  the  current  challenges  identified  in  the  previous 
section, this presents a rather bleak outlook. Interestingly, 19% 
of participants did feel investigations in the future would take 
less time. Unfortunately, a subsequent question did not follow 
this  up  to  understand  why  they  felt  this.  Arguably  however, 
given the increases in cases, increases in technology, increases 
in  the  volume  of  data  and  increases  in  the  sophistication  of 
analysis  required,  given  current  technology  capabilities  this 
will have to result in an increase in the resources required. 

in 

Exploring exactly where respondents felt increases would 
result gave rise to a set of interesting results – as illustrated in 
Figure  5.  All  participants,  independent  of  their  role,  felt  that 
investigators  would  experience  an  increase  in  mobile-based 

cases.  However,  with  the  remaining  categories,  a  greater 
proportion of researchers than practitioners felt there would be 
increases.  The 
largest  difference  between  stakeholders 
opinions was with regards to the role embedded forensics will 
have  –  with  59%  of  researchers  envisaging  an  increase  in 
demand  but 
is  accompanied  with  only  30%  of 
practitioners. 

this 

 

Figure 5. Increase in Forensic Investigations 

Participants were also asked to rank the future challenges. 
Many  of  the  categories  were  a  duplicate  from  the  current 
challenges, in addition to a number of broader categories such 
as  tool  capability,  visualization  and  social  networks.  An 
analysis  of  Figure  6  reveals  a  similar  result  to  the  earlier 
challenge question – with cloud computing, anti-forensics and 
encryption remaining high priorities. This is interesting from 
the perspective that participants not only feel these are current 
issues but that no tools or solutions exist (or arguably are on 
the  horizon)  to  solve  them  in  the  future.  This  raises  further 
questions  are  to  why  this  is  the  case?  In  reality  a  mix  of 
technological  barriers  and  legislative  impediments  are  likely 
reasons.  Further  down  the  list  and  challenges  such  as  social 
networks,  forensic  analyses  and  network  forensics  come 
through as key priorities. 

 

Figure 6.The Relative Ranking of Future Challenges 

An  analysis  based  upon  stakeholder  perspectives  (as 
illustrated in  Figure  7) show a similar outlook with respect to 
the  key  priorities  such  as  cloud  computing  and  encryption. 
However,  they  do  differ  with  respect  to  a  number  of  other 
priorities.  Researchers  feel  anti-forensics,  steganography  and 
visualization to be less significant than practitioners. Instead, 

they  feel  social  networking,  digital  forensic  tools,  forensic 
analyses and legislation as more significant priorities.  

Figure 7. The Relative Stakeholder Ranking of Future Challenges 

 

Given  the  challenges  that  exist,  a  number  of  questions 
were  posed  to  participants  with  a  view  of  examining  their 
opinion towards approaches or technologies that could have an 
impact  upon  the  challenges.  Initially,  they  were  asked  if 
relevant 
having 
evidence/artifacts  was 
(83%), 
respondents  felt  this  was  a  essential  (with  an  average  Likert 
score of 4.2). 

identify  and  extract 
important.  Overwhelming 

the  ability 

to 

 

Figure 8. Importance of Identify Relevant Artifacts 

A  further  question  then  asked  whether  criminal  profiling 
could  be  an  approach  to  identifying  relevant  artifacts. 
Theoretically, profiling offers the investigator the opportunity 
to  more  easily  identify  and  extract  relevant  evidence.  As 
illustrated in Figure 9, 85% of participants thought this was an 
important (or very important) area (average Likert score of 4). 

 
Figure 9. The Role/Application of Criminal Profiling in Digital Forensics 
Two questions were then focused upon approaches that aid 
the  aforementioned  approaches.  Overall,  participants  were 
very positive towards the use of such technologies. They were 
asked  if  they  felt  automation  was  an  important  factor  in  the 
future. Automation has the potential to remove a considerable 
volume  of  manual  tasks.  As  illustrated  in  Figure  10,  58%  of 
respondents felt it was important. 

 
Figure 10. The Role and Importance Automation can have within Digital 

Forensics 

The  second  question,  specifically  asked  them  whether 
artificial  intelligence  (AI)  approaches  could  have  a  role  in 
assisting investigators. Overall, the response was more mixed 
with an average Likert score of 3.7 - suggesting a slight skew 
towards  using  the  approach.  Whilst  the  use  of  AI  has  been 
successfully applied in a range of fields, including aspects of 
forensics, it will inevitably introduce errors which themselves 
would require verification by an investigator.  

Finally,  respondents  were  asked  about  the  relationship 
between  the  researcher  and  practitioner  communities  – 
specifically  whether 
improved 
communication  and  collaboration.  Overwhelming,  93%  of 
respondents  felt  the  domain  would  benefit  (Likert  score  of 
4.6).  As  illustrated  in  Figure  11,  the  question  resulted  in  the 
highest proportion selecting 5 out of 5 on the scale. 

it  would  benefit 

from 

 

Figure 11. Improved Communication & Collaboration Between 

Stakeholders 

An  analysis  of  stakeholder  responses  to  these  questions 
revealed  a  close  similarity,  with  no  significant  difference  in 
opinions.  This  felt  a  little  at  odd  to  what  would  have  been 
expected.  Given  these  challenges  are  well  known,  it  would 
have  been  expected  that  researchers  would  be  more  actively 
looking to such technologies to reduce the problem. 
D.  Legislative Aspects 

The last section sought to explore how legislative aspects 
have an impact upon digital forensics. Asked whether they felt 
legislation was an inhibitor or enabler, participants were fairly 
even in their consideration – with an average Likert score of 
3.3. As illustrated in Figure 12, this suggests a significant divide 
in  the  impact  that  legislation  has.  Whilst  it  is  encouraging 
there is a very mild skew towards being an enabler, a 25% of 
respondents feel it is specifically an inhibiting factor. 

 
Figure 12. The Extent to Which Legislation is an Enabler or Inhibitor 

Investigating the issue further, respondents were asked to 
what  extent  they  felt  legalization  involving  crossing  borders 
was the issue. As illustrated in Figure 13, respondents did feel 
legalization  involving  different  jurisdictions  was  a  concern 
(74% and a average Likert score of 4).  

Figure 13. The Extent to Which Cross Border Legislation is a Barrier 

 

is  required 

to 

The  final  question  sought  to  examine  to  what  extent 
current  tools  are  capable  of  considering  the  legislative 
requirements.  For  example,  limiting  search  and  automated 
analysis  to  specific  and  permitted  data  areas  but  not  others. 
This 
in  countries  where  warrants  provide 
permissions to analyze specific data areas and not others. For 
example,  the  USA  has  strong  privacy  laws  that  restrict 
investigators  in  what  they  analyze  based  upon  what  the 
suspect  criminal  activity  is.  Interestingly,  respondents  in 
general  felt  existing  tools  were  capable  of  achieving  this  (as 
illustrated  in  Figure  14).  However,  to  the  author’s  best 
knowledge,  none  of  the  commercial  tools  are  specifically 
equipped  with 
take  relevant  national 
legislation  into  consideration.  For  example,  data  carving 
analyses  will  extract  data  from  the  complete  image  –  not 
defined  areas.  It  also  requires  the  investigator  to  specifically 
understand  the  remit  of  the  investigation  and  the  nature  of 
relevant legislation.  

the  capability 

 

Figure 14. Forensic Tools Capable of Considering Legislation 

IV.  DISCUSSION 

The survey has raised a number of considerations for the 
forensic  community.  Fundamentally,  it  has  highlighted  the 
importance  and  prioritization  of  key  challenges.  The  domain 
of  anti-forensics,  including  encryption  and  steganography, 
remain  a  significant  current  and  future  challenge  for 
investigators.  Unfortunately,  with  people  becoming  more 
mindful  of  information  security,  the  further  introduction  of 
security  within  operating  systems  (e.g.  full  disk  encryption 
within  Microsoft  and  Apple  Mac),  the  promotion  of  anti-

to 

locate 

forensic  technologies  and  wiping  of  media,  the  ability  for 
investigators 
relevant  evidence  will  become 
increasingly  challenging.  As  suggested  by  [4],  forensic  tools 
will  have  to  become  less  focused  upon  identifying  evidence 
that is criminal in its own right and become more intelligent in 
identifying  artifacts  that  highlight  misuse.  For  example, 
analyses will need to be developed that are capable of picking 
up 
the  application  of  anti-forensic 
techniques.  Whilst  not  evidence  of  the  crime  itself,  it  will 
provide invaluable intelligence to the examiner to how to best 
proceed.   

trace  evidence 

to 

There was an expectation when designing the survey tool, 
that  given  the  wide  range  of  challenges  that  exist  within  the 
domain,  the  responses  to  questions  such  as  the  current  tool 
capabilities  and  current  technology  concerns  would  have 
revealed  a  higher  proportion  with  the  feeling  that  current 
approaches  are  not  meeting  the  requirements.  However,  this 
was not the case. Without further information, it is difficult to 
suggest the reason for this; however, there does appear to be a 
disparity between the challenges and the impact they actually 
have in practice. For example, upon asking participants, what 
proportion  of  cases  involved  advanced  data-hiding  only  7  of 
the 42 respondents had on a frequent basis. If challenges are 
not manifesting themselves in practical cases, it is logically to 
assume these will have less of an impact. 

this 

issue 

resulted 

reducing 

The  respondents  have  reaffirmed  that  the  volume  of  data 
and  the  time  taken  to  undertake  an  investigation  are  key 
limiting factors. Further exploring techniques and technologies 
for  potentially 
favorably 
suggesting future research should focus upon approaches such 
as  criminal  profiling  and  automation.  In  particular,  [7]  has 
presented  an  interesting  application  of  criminal  profiling  to 
digital  forensics.  A  key  enabling  technology  in  many  other 
fields,  AI,  has  provided  approaches  to  data  mine  large 
volumes  of  data,  have  strong  pattern  associative  capabilities 
and  result  in  detection  performances  that  outperform  many 
other approaches [8-10]. There is some obvious concern over 
the  applicability  of  such  a  technology  within  forensics; 
however,  with  careful  implementation  and  configuration,  AI 
techniques  could  become  useful  tools.  It  is  likely  such  tools 
were  reside  initially  within  triage,  with  investigators  still 
utilized  to  confirm  their  findings.  However,  as  they  advance 
and  trust  and  reliability  is  established,  AI-based  approaches 
would be useful in dealing with standard cases (e.g. those that 
do not deploy advanced data hiding techniques). 

The  need  for  better  communication  and  collaboration 
between researcher and practitioner communities is imperative 
for the creation of effective solutions particularly against the 
increasing range of challenges. Moreover, the nature of these 
challenges is incorporating a wider range of technology-based 
knowledge – forensics is no longer focused merely hard drive 
analysis  but  increasingly  needing  to  understand  complex 
distributed systems and innovative applications such as cloud 
computing  and  social  networking.  Researchers  have  the 
necessary  knowledge  but  often  lack  the  practitioner  insight 
into problem. 

Interesting, comparing the previous work by [4] with this 
research,  almost  a  decade  on,  and  some  key  differences  and 

similarities  appear.  Whilst  education/training  was  not  an 
option provided in the list of current concerns, notably, it was 
not  added  in  by  any  of  the  participants.  Furthermore,  an 
analysis  of  the  respondents  suggests  a  well  educated  and 
trained population. This suggests that training and education is 
an issue the industry has managed to contend with. However, 
issues of technology, encryption and tools highlighted in 2004 
remain current and future challenges almost a decade on. 

The  findings  have  also  highlighted  significantly  the 
increasing  attention  being  given  to  developing  areas  of 
technology.  Cloud  computing  and  social  networking  were 
ranked in the top 5 future concerns. In one respect, the reason 
for this might be due to the changing location of the artifacts – 
moving  away  from  the  tried  and  tested  hard  drive  onto 
systems that are complex, proprietary and not well understood 
by the forensics community [11]. However, these technologies 
also represent a second potentially more disconcerting trend – 
the  behavior  of 
Increasingly 
individuals are no longer tied to a single computer, but instead 
have a multitude of devices and technologies with which they 
can  access  information.  This  will  only  increase  and  forensic 
investigators, procedures and tools are not designed for such 
examinations. 

is  changing. 

individuals 

 

V.  CONCLUSIONS & FUTURE WORK 

the 

Exploring 

The paper has presented a study that has both confirmed a 
number  of  challenges  within  digital  forensics  and  also 
provided  an  understanding  over 
their  relative  priority. 
Interestingly, amongst the usual suspects of anti-forensics and 
encryption, cloud computing and social networking have been 
identified as key future challenges. 
issues  from 

the  differing  stakeholder 
perspectives of the research and practitioner did reveal some 
interesting aspects – with researchers focusing upon the new 
challenges  and  practitioners  remaining  focused  upon  issues 
that  still  have  a  direct  impact.  With  the  exception  of  cloud 
computing  –  which  both  parties  agreed  was  the  single  top 
priority, practitioners highlighted for both the current concerns 
and future challenges, anti-forensics and encryption in the top 
three issues. However, for researchers, social networking and 
tool capability were amongst the top priority future challenges. 
Future  work  must  focus  upon  developing  effective 
approaches  to  solving  these  challenges  and  provide  a  robust 
research environment that is proactively developing forensic-
based  solutions  before  practitioners  identify  them  as  issues. 
Future  work  must  focus  upon  the  technology  horizon  rather 
than  merely  “fire  fighting”  the  issues.  Consideration  to 
forensic capabilities of evolving and new technologies needs 
to take place, so that a forensic capability exists at the outset 
of a new technology rather than years after the technology has 
been adopted (and misused!). 

REFERENCES 

[1]   Guidance Software, “EnCase Forensic v7”, Guidance Software. Retrieved 
from  http://www.guidancesoftware.com/encase-forensic.htm  [Accessed 
21/5/13] 

[2]   AccessData,  “FTK  –  Forensic  Toolkit”,  AccessData.  Retrieved  from 
[Accessed 

http://www.accessdata.com/products/digital-forensics/ftk 
21/5/13] 

[8]   S.  Mukkamala,  A.  Sung,  “Significant  features  for  network  forensic 
analysis using artificial intelligence techniques”, International Journal of 
Digital Evidence, vol. 1, no. 4, 2003. 

[3]   M.  Rogers,  K.  Seigfried,  “The  future  of  computer  forensics:  a  needs 

analysis survey”, Computers & Security, vol. 23, no. 1, 2004, pp. 12-16. 

[9]   N.  Beebe,  J.  Clark,  “Dealing  with  terabyte  data  sets  in  digital 

investigations, Advances in Digital Forensics, vol. 194, 2005, pp. 3-16. 

[4]   S.  Garfinkel,  “Digital  forensics  research:  the  next  10  years”,  Digital 

Investigation, vol. 7, 2010, pp. 64-73 

[5]   G.G.  Richard  III,  V.  Roussev,  “Next-generation  digital  forensics”, 

Communications of the ACM, vol.49, no. 2, 2006. 

[6]   A.J. Marcella, R.S. Greenfield, Cyber Forensics, Auerbach Publications, 

2002. 

[7]   Rogers  M.  The  role  of  criminal  proﬁling  in  computer  forensic 

investigations. Computers & Security, vol. 22, no. 4, 2003, pp. 292-298. 

 

[10]  B.  Hoelz,  C.  Ralha,  R.  Geeverghese,  “Artifical  intelligence  applied  to 
computer  forensics”,  Proceedings  of  the  2009  ACM  Symposium  on 
Applied Computing, 2009, pp. 883-888. 

[11]  K. Ruan, I. Baggilli, J. Carthy, T. Kechadi, Survey on Cloud Forensics 
and  Critical  Criteria  for  Cloud  Forensic  Capability:  a  Preliminary 
Analysis’,  Proceedings  of  the  6th Annual  Conference  of  the  ADFSL 
Conference on Digital Forensics, Security and Law, Richmond, Virginia, 
USA.  

