Enhancing Digital Business Ecosystem Trust and           

Reputation with Centrality Measures  

         Donovan Isherwood1 and Marijke Coetzee2 
Academy of Computer Science and Software Engineering 

University of Johannesburg, Johannesburg, 

donovan.isherwood@gmail.com1 marijkec@uj.ac.za2 

South Africa 

 
 

Abstract—  Digital  Business  Ecosystem  (DBE)  is  a  decentralised 
environment  where  very  small  enterprises  (VSEs)  and  small  to 
medium  sized  enterprises  (SMEs)  interoperate  by  establishing 
collaborations with each other. Collaborations play a  major role 
in  the  development  of  DBEs  where  it  is  often  difficult  to  select 
partners,  as  they  are  most  likely  strangers.  Even  though  trust 
forms  the  basis  for  collaboration  decisions,  trust  and  reputation 
for  each  participant. 
information  may  not  be  available 
Recommendations 
therefore 
necessary to  help with the selection process. Given the  nature of 
DBEs,  social  network  centrality  measures  that  can  influence 
power and control in the network need to be considered for DBE 
trust  and  reputation.  A  number  of  social  network  centralities, 
which influence reputation in social graphs  have been studied in 
the  past.  This  paper  investigates  an  unexploited  centrality 
measure, betweenness centrality, as a metric to be considered for 
trust and reputation.  

from  other  participants  are 

Keywords:  Digital  Business  Ecosystem, 

trust,  reputation, 

centrality measures, social network analysis 

I     INTRODUCTION 

The adoption of new forms of e-business for small and medium 
enterprise  (SME)  has  been  identified  as  a  key  priority  for 
fostering  innovation  and  competitiveness  [37].  A  Digital 
Business  Ecosystem  (DBE)  is  an  environment  where  very 
small enterprises (VSEs) and small to medium sized enterprises 
(SMEs)  can  interoperate.  The  aim  of  the  Digital  Business 
Ecosystem  is  to  support  its  participants  to  co-evolve  in  a 
competitive  but  at  the  same  time  collaborative  environment 
[27].  Collaboration  ensures  that  the  entire  Digital  Business 
Ecosystem’s  market  value  is  increased  to  be  able  to  compete 
against bigger competitors [23].  

The  Digital  Business  Ecosystem  vision  presents  unique 
challenges  that  are  difficult  to  manage  as  it  employs  a 
decentralised  model  that  is  open  to  a  diverse  range  of 
participants  across  many  locations.  It  is  apparent  that  peer-to-
peer (P2P) implementations lend themselves naturally to digital 
ecosystem architectures [19]. Interactions in a Digital Business 
Ecosystem  can  be  modeled  by  a  multi-agent  peer-to-peer 
network  where  agents  represent  VSEs  and  SMEs  that  interact 
with  each  other.  The  network  of  agents  can  be  viewed  as  a 
social  graph  where 
the  agents  are  the  nodes  and  the 
relationships are the edges.  

strangers at the time is difficult. Since trust forms the basis of 
all human interaction, collaboration and society [6], agents can 
decide to collaborate based on the trust they have in each other. 
The  more  trustworthy  a  partner  is,  the  higher  its  reputation  is 
likely  to  be  in  its  community.  Participants  with  higher 
reputation  are  more  likely  to  be  selected,  leading  to  further 
business  and  more profit.  Modeling,  computing  and  analyzing 
trust  and  reputation  for  Digital  Business  Ecosystems  is  a 
challenging  issue  as  participants  leave  and  join  the  network 
continuously.  Social  network  analysis  is  a  rich  model  in 
conceptualization and  investigation. It provides a powerful set 
of  concepts  and  methods  for  designing,  modeling  and 
analyzing  complex  situations  [26].  The  motivation  for  this 
paper is to discover social network metrics that can be used to 
assist with trust and reputation for Digital Business Ecosystem.  

Next,  section  2  provides  a  motivating  example  to  give 
background on  a  Digital Business  Ecosystem.  Section 3  gives 
background  on  Digital  Business  Ecosystem 
trust  and 
reputation.  In  section  4,  the  Digital  Business  Ecosystem  is 
defined  in  terms  of  a  social  graph,  and  the  properties  that 
influence social graphs with regards to trust and reputation are 
discussed. Section 5 identifies how closeness and betweenness 
can  influence  trust  and  reputation  and  proposes  a  framework 
for  Digital  Business  Ecosystem  trust  and  reputation  systems. 
Section 6 concludes the paper.  

I.  MOTIVATING EXAMPLE 

 

Consider  the  Digital  Business  Ecosystem  social  network 
graph in Figure 1. It consists of nodes representing very small 
enterprises (VSE) such as builders and plumbers, and medium 
sized enterprises (SMEs)  such  as  suppliers, collaborating  with 
each  other.  The  connectivity  of  nodes  indicated  by  the  social 
graph is generally not defined by geography or proximity, but 
by information sharing and transactions between nodes.   

In  time,  participants  who  do  not  successfully  exchange 
information  become  less  strongly  connected,  and  those  who 
contribute achieve stronger connections. This leads to a small-
world  network  topology  where  node  position  in  the  network 
plays a major role in the economic growth of the node. Small-
networks  have  many 
strongly  connected  clusters  or 
communities,  see  labels  x  –  z  in  Figure  1,  with  a  few 
connections between these communities. These networks have  

As  collaborations  play  a  major  role  in  the  development  of 
Digital Business Ecosystems, the selection of partners who are 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 1. Digital Business Ecosystem 

 

 

very  high  clustering  coefficient  and  small  characteristic  path 
lengths [26].  

For  any  node  seeking  to  form  collaborations,  there  is  the 
problem  of  choosing  a  partner.  Partnering  with  any  available 
VSE  or  SME  is  not  feasible  as  their  reliability  is  not  known 
beforehand.  By  making  use  of  recommendations  from  others, 
better  partners  can  be  selected.  Such  recommendations  are 
highly  influenced  by  the  extent  of  overlap  of  social  relations 
between  VSEs  or  SME.  There  is  generally  a  tendency  for 
nodes  to  ask  recommendations  from  partners  that  are  close  to 
them  in  the  network  space.  For  example,  if  my  partners  have 
had good experiences with a specific SME, my perceived value 
of  that  SME  increases.  The  network  of  immediate  contacts  is 
thus  an  important  source  of  information  about  possible  future 
contacts. Also, the number of indirect links between two VSEs 
may  have  an  effect  on  the  probability  that  they  will  form  a 
direct  link  or  partnership  in  the  future.    In  Digital  Business 
Ecosystems  no  central  party  can  dominate because  this  would 
provide a significant barrier to the growth and sustainability of 
the  environment.  If  a  node  such  as  eBuild  Co  would  like  to 
become  a  strong  competitor  in  the  environment,  they  need  to 
collaborate  with  those  who  have  the  strongest  ties  in  the 
network in order to be successful. eBuild Co will thus have to 
determine 
reputation  of  other  nodes  by  sourcing 
recommendations before making a decision to collaborate with 
them.  If  eBuild  Co  knew  that  the  most  trusted  and  effective 
community  was,  for  example,  community  x  they  would  try  to 

the 

become  part  of  this  community.  This  can  only  be  made 
possible  if  a  node  in  the  Digital  Business  Ecosystem, 
positioned  in  between  the  two  communities  could  introduce 
eBuild  Co  to  this  group.  It  is  thus  important  for  eBuild  Co  to 
determine who these brokers are as they play an important role 
in fostering growth and innovation.  

Next,  trust  and  reputation  features  of  Digital  Business 

Ecosystem systems are described.  

II. DIGITAL BUSINESS ECOSYSTEM TRUSTAND 

REPUTATION 

A Digital Business Ecosystem can be represented as society 
of  autonomous  agents  conforming  to  a  peer-to-peer  network 
architecture  [19]  [23].  These  autonomous  agents  compete  and 
collaborate  with  each  other  to  benefit  themselves  and  the 
communities they inhabit. The location of a specific member of 
a  community  within  a  Digital  Business  Ecosystem  social 
network  can  be  used  to  infer  some  properties  about  their 
reputation. Organisations that are effective and highly regarded 
by most members of the Digital Business Ecosystem tend to be 
highly  connected  nodes  in  the  social  network  graph.  Such 
information  could  be  used  by  the  reputation  mechanism  of 
agents  instead  of  having  to  use  the  ratings  issued  by  each 
participant.  

It is necessary to clearly distinguish between the notions of 
trust  and 
for  Digital  Business  Ecosystems. 
Reputation  is  generally  computed  over  a  period  of  time, 

reputation 

Supplier BSupplier ASupplier CBuilder BBuilder AeBuild CoPlumbernmPlumberElectricianBuilderPlumberPlumberElectricianSupplier DElectricianBuilderwxyzwhereas  trust  is  based  on  a  personal  bias  before  taking  a 
decision to interact with another person.  

Ecosystem  agent  forms  a  subjective  opinion  on  participants  it 
interacts with based on the computation it performs.   

Literature  defines  trust  as  the  extent  to  which  one  party  is 
willing  to  depend  on  something  or  somebody  in  a  given 
situation  with  a  feeling  of  relative  security,  even  though 
negative  consequences  are  possible  [6]  [21].  If  the  agent  of 
Builder  A  has  trust  in  the  agent  of  eBuild  Co,  it  is  confident 
that  the  agent  will  behave  in  a  particular  way.  Trust  is 
subjectively formed [19] and cannot be assumed to be mutual. 
The trust value used by the agent represents the confidence the 
agent has in the expected behaviour of another.   

Reputation  is  an  objective  measure  assigned  to  an  agent, 
representing  the  collective  evaluation  from  a  group  of  agents 
that  have  interacted  with  it.  The  reputation  of  Supplier  A  is 
based  on  all  past  actions  with  the  agents  that  it  has  interacted 
with  and  associated  ratings  [19].  An  agent  with  a  good 
reputation will be trusted more by other agents, than one with a 
bad  reputation.  This  implies  that  trust  can  be  built  through 
reputation.  

it  simply  encodes 

The  interactions  between  Digital  Business  Ecosystem 
participants  can  be  recorded  by  a  graph,  where  an  arc  in  the 
graph  corresponds  to  an  interaction  between  the  participants 
who are nodes of the graph. Such a graph can be called a social 
network  as 
interactions  among  all 
participants.  If  a  network  graph  is  directed,  an  edge  from 
Builder  A  to  Builder  B  implies  that  Builder  A  recommends 
Builder  B.  Intuitively,  network  graph  centrality  measures  are 
established  over  aspects  such  as  trust  transitivity,  where  it  is 
more likely that individuals will interact with friends of friends 
than with unknown parties. Also, individuals are more inclined 
to trust someone who is trusted by some of their trusted friends. 
Important questions that arise are - where is the graph stored? 
How  is  the  trust  computation  done?  How  can  the  trust  metric 
be used to help making decisions?  

In  order  to  evaluate  a  Digital  Business  Ecosystems 
participant’s  trustworthiness,  an  agent  needs  to  rely  on  the 
judgments  of  other  peers  who  have  already  interacted  with 
them  and  shared  their  impression.  These  impressions  are 
expressed as trust metrics. Trust metrics are divided into those 
with global and those with local scope [31].  

Global  trust  metrics  take  into  account  all  members  of  the 
social  network  and  their  relationships.  A  global  trust  rank  is 
computed based on the opinion of all nodes in the network. A 
disadvantage is that the entire graph must be known and stored 
and the computation may be expensive.  

On the other hand, when computing trust and reputation in 
the  local  community  or  neighbourhood,  only  the  local  graph 
needs to be explored. These local trust metrics are subjective as 
they are personalized and their computation scales well.  Local 
trust metrics operate on partial trust graph information defined 
by  personalized  webs of trust  where  only  neighbour  links  and 
their  direct  links  are  explored  to  a  set  of  nodes  reachable 
through  these  relationships.  Merging  these  local  trust  web 
graphs gives the global trust graph. 

The  nature  of  Digital  Business  Ecosystems,  therefore 
dictate  that  local  trust  metrics  should  be  preferred  because  of 
its  decentralised  peer-to-peer  architecture.  A  Digital  Business 

to 

Approaches 

trust  and  reputation  computation  are 
generally  classified  as  centralised  or  decentralised  [31].  More 
recently,  hybrid  approaches  [34]  accommodate  the  difficulties 
of decentralised reputation systems.  

Centralised:  Centralised  trust  and  reputation  systems  are 
found  in  e-commerce  applications,  for  example,  eBay  [8]. 
Here, a central entity is responsible for collecting ratings from 
all parties involved in an interaction. The reputation of users is 
public  and  global  and  is  computed  by  the  system.  The 
advantage is that there is less communication required between 
users.   

trust  and 

Decentralised: 

In  decentralised 

reputation 
systems,  agents  represent  users  or  organisations.  There  is  no 
central  party  for  agents  to  share  their  ratings  with  each  other 
and  no  global  or  public  reputation  exists  [8].  For  example, 
when Builder A wants to find out the reputation of Builder B, 
it’s agent has to ask other agents for their ratings about Builder 
B,  including  those  of  Builder  A’s  friends  or  the  friends  of 
friends.  This  implies  a  large  volume  of  communication 
between agents. These ratings are then combined by the agent 
of Builder A to determine the reputation of Builder B.  

Hybrid:  Recent  work  introduced  a  super-agent  based 
mechanism  [34],  inspired  from  super-peer  networks,  for 
reputation  management  to  solve  the  inefficiency  problem  of  a 
decentralised trust and reputation systems. Now, an agent with 
poor capabilities will not be able to cause system blockages as 
in a true decentralised approach. Super-agents collect and store 
feedback about services, build reputation of services, and share 
reputation  information  with  other  agents.  A  super-agent  can 
form communities based on its interests and judging criteria. A 
community-based  reputation  for  services,  found  on 
the 
collective  opinion  of 
its  community  members  can  be 
developed, and shared with the community members. 

their  agents  need 

Even  though  centralised  methods  are  simpler  and  more 
efficient to use they may not be well-suited to Digital Business 
in  Digital 
Ecosystems.  As  participants  are  autonomous 
Business  Ecosystems, 
to 
follow  a 
decentralised  approach  where  they  can  decide  how  to  weigh 
ratings provided  by other agents  based  on  how  much  they  are 
trusted, thereby ensuring personalized reputation. However, for 
Digital  Business  Ecosystems  this  approach  represents  some 
difficulties  such  as  how  to  find  reputation  information.  In  a 
centralised  system,  the  central  entity  in  charge  stores  the 
reputation  graph  and  related  information.  In  a  decentralised 
P2P  network  the  answer  is  not  clear-cut.  The  agent  may  not 
know  which  other  agents  have  interacted  with  this  agent  for 
whom they are trying to build reputation. Also, agents  are not 
always  available  at  all  times.  If  they  are  offline,  their  ratings 
about other agents are not available at the time of request. Also, 
the  Digital  Business  Ecosystem  illustrated  in  Figure  1  is 
typically  a  small-world  network  that  has  a  few  strongly 
connected  communities,  with  a  few  connections  between 
communities. Very often, participants of these communities are 
not  sophisticated  and  do  not  have  the  ability  to  support  and 
manage  a  reputation  system.  A  super-agent  approach  to  trust 

and  reputation  may  therefore  ideally  be  suited  to  Digital 
Business Ecosystems environments.  

In the following section, social network centrality metrics is 
described  in  the  context  of  Digital  Business  Ecosystem  trust 
and reputation systems.  

III.  TRUST AND REPUTATION USING SOCIAL 

NETWORK ANALYSIS 

the  patterns,  behaviours  and 

The  underlying  idea  of  deriving  a  participant  node’s 
reputation  from  a  social  network  topology  is  that  reputable 
members  in  a  social  network  tend  to  be  highly  connected 
powerful people who are experts or people who share valuable 
resources  easily.  Such  measures  can  be  determined  by  social 
network analysis that is a technique used to study social graphs 
to  analyse 
interactions  of 
communication  in  social  groups  [26].  Key  players  in  a  social 
network  can  be  identified  as  well  as  groups  in  large  and 
complex  social  networks.  Groups  represent  clusters  in  the 
social  graph  consisting  of  nodes  that  are  more  central,  nodes 
that  are  peripheral,  and  nodes  that  lie  in  between  all  these 
nodes [26]. One of the main  social network analysis measures 
is centrality which is used to define the actor’s position relative 
to the other actors in his or her social graph [26].  

reputation  system 

Many  reputation  systems  are  based  on  network  graph 
centrality  measures.  An  example  of  a  well-known  network 
graph-based 
is  PageRank  [33].  The 
PageRank  algorithm  uses  hyper-links  as  a  sign  that  one  web 
page  recommends  another  web  page.  PageRank  can  also  be 
used  to  indicate  the  number  of  times  a  random  surfer  visits  a 
web page, thereby reflecting the popularity and reputation of a 
web page. A drawback of PageRank as a reputation measure is 
that all outgoing links from a node are considered equally and 
not whether the interaction was a good or bad experience [35]. 
In order to address this problem the TrustRank [33] algorithm 
was defined.   

The focus of the discussion is on the local and decentralised 
characteristics  of  social  network  graphs,  to  accommodate  the 
nature  of  Digital  Business  Ecosystem  trust  and  reputation 
systems.  Next,  the  social  network  perspective  used  in  social 
network analysis is described. The role and effect of centrality 
measures on trust and reputation is then analyzed.  

A.  Network perspective 

Network perspective of social network analysis is achieved 
from  two  perspectives,  a  socio-centric  perspective  and  an 
egocentric perspective. 

1) 

Socio-centric Perspective 

A  socio-centric  perspective  analyses  a  complete  and 
bounded  social  graph  from  a  global  perspective  [7].  Figure  1 
gives the socio-centric view of the Digital Business Ecosystem 
social graph. Here, trust metrics take into account all the peers 
as  well  as  the  trust  links  that  connect  them  [31].  This  means 
that  each  node  only  consider  the  global  reputation  of  nodes 
calculated  via  a  centralised  reputation  manager  that  can  view 
the  entire  network.  As  mentioned,  this  is  process  intensive  as 
the  complete  social  graph,  which  may  change  continuously, 
needs  to  be  considered.  The  centralised  and  global  approach 
limits the personalised property of trust as a nodes trust would 

only  be  considered  from  a  single  third  party  perspective  and 
not  personally  [14].  Due  to  these  facts  this  approach  would 
therefore not be useful in Digital Business Ecosystem trust and 
reputation systems.  

2) 

Egocentric Perspective 

the  connections  between 

An egocentric perspective analyses only the ego network of 
a  node  which  consists  of  the  node  (actor),  its  friends  (alters) 
and  all 
them  [7].  The  ego 
neighborhood is the collection of ego and all nodes with which 
ego  has  a  connection  at  some  path  length.   In  social  network 
analysis,  this  includes  only  ego  and  actors  that  are  directly 
adjacent and all of the ties among all of the actors to whom ego 
has a direct connection [31]. If one considers  eBuild Co as an 
ego 
the 
neighbourhood to be considered.  

then  community  w  would  be 

in  Figure  1, 

Performing  trust  and  reputation  computations  from  this 
perspective  is  less  process  intensive  as  each  node  such  as 
eBuild  Co  only  maintains  trust  and  reputation  for  its  own 
locally  stored  ego  network.  It  is  natural  to  use  an  egocentric 
perspective  in  peer-to-peer  networks  due  the  decentralised 
nature of these networks.  

Next,  social  network  centrality  measures  for  Digital 

Business Ecosystem trust and reputation are discussed.  

B.  Social network centrality for trust and reputation  

Centrality measures give the relative importance of a node 
within the graph [7]. In social networks, trust and reputation is 
computed  by  considering  the  strength  of  the  relationship 
between  two  nodes  defined  by  direct  trust,  and  the  further 
influence  of  other  relationships  defined  by  indirect  trust.  In 
direct  trust,  local  social  network  centralities  to  be  considered 
are degree centrality and tie strength. These metrics can affect 
the  availability  and  accuracy  of  recommendation  information 
provided to and about the node. Indirect trust on the other hand 
is  a  result  of  the  transitive  property  and  propagation  of  trust 
which  can  be  influenced  by  a  number  of  centrality  measures 
such  as  shortest path, density  and clustering  coefficient.  Short 
paths  and  dense  clusters  can  lead  to  more  accurate,  reliable, 
and trustworthy indirect trust values and recommendations.  

Direct and indirect trust, as well as the centrality measures 

that influence these trust values, are discussed next.  

Direct Trust 

Direct  trust  exists  between  two  nodes  that  have  a  trust 
relationship  established;  this  is  sometimes  referred  to  as 
individual  trust  [25] [17].  Consider  the  case of just  two  nodes 
as in Figure 2. A  Builder and eBuild Co, taken from Figure 1, 
is  labeled  A  and  B  respectively.  There  are  always  three 
elements that form trust regardless of which definition is used, 
namely, the trustor, trustee, and the state of trust [9] [1]. If B is 
the  trustor  and A  the  trustee, Tb-a is  the  state of trust.  Trust  is 
subjective  meaning  that  B  will  not  necessarily  trust  A  to  the 
same extent that A will trust B and vice versa. This implies that 
trust is asymmetric [14]. The direct trust value can evolve over 
time  as  the  two  companies  collaborate  more  often  thereby 
potentially  forming  a  stronger  trust  relationship.  In  figure  2, 
each  node  has  a  single  incoming  and outgoing link. Trust  and 
reputation  computation  may  be  very  different  for  nodes  with 
many links, than with nodes with few links. 

Figure 2. Direct trust relationship 

 

Social  network  metrics  to  be  considered  next  are  degree, 
in  ego 

tie  strength.  Both  can  be  used 

density  and 
neighborhoods such as community w in Figure 1.  

1) 

Degree 

The  degree  centrality  of  a  node  is  defined  as  the  total 
number  of  connections  the  node  has  [2]  [18].  In  a  directed 
graph  there  are  two  degrees  namely  outdegree  and  indegree. 
Outdegree  is  the  number  of  connections  a  node  has  to  other 
nodes,  i.e.  the  number  of  nodes  that  can  be  reached  from  a 
node in one hop [4]. In Figure 2, both nodes have an indegree 
and outdegree of 1.  

The  effect  of  degree  on  trust  is  that  it  can  be  seen  as  a 
parameter  which  defines  the  extent  to  which  a  node  would 
convey  information  about  another  node  to  the  trustor  [1].  A 
node  that  is  reliable  will  have  a  higher  outdegree  than  a  node 
who is less reliable [1]. Indegree is the extent to which a node 
receives information about another node from the other nodes. 
Therefore, node with both high indegree and outdegree are well 
connected  and  could  therefore  play  an  important  role  in  the 
computation of trust and reputation.  

2) 

Tie Strength 

In  social  network  analysis,  tie  strengths  are  classified  as 
either strong ties or weak ties and it refers to the strength of the 
relationship.  A  strong  tie  represents  a  strong  trust  relationship 
between  two  nodes  and  a  weak  tie  represents  a  lower  trust 
relationship  between  two  nodes.  The  weight  which  is  used  to 
measure  the  strength  of  ties  is  the  weight  of  the  edges 
connecting  nodes.  Weak  ties  will  have  a  weight  relatively 
smaller  than  the  weights  of  the  connections  a  node  regularly 
maintains, and the opposite is true for strong ties [18]. A node 
with  many  strong  ties  will  be  more  trusted  than  a  node  with 
many weak ties.  

Indirect Trust 

Now  consider  the  case  where  the  social  network  graph 
grows  and  more  nodes  are  linked  together.  Another  Builder, 
shown  as  C  establishes  a  relationship  with  B.  There  is  direct 
trust  between  these  two  nodes.  If  A  would  like  to  collaborate 
with  C  it  may  ask  B  for  a  recommendation  of  C.  The 
transitivity  property  of 
the  network  topology 
identifying paths can be used to assist A in its decision whether 
it  should  trust  C.  Because  of  the  number  of  links,  trust  is 
propagated through the network [14] [17] [22]. Transitive trust 
implies that if A trusts B and B trusts C then it is inferred that 
A can trust C to some degree [24].  

trust  and 

The  trust  established  from  transitive  trust  is  known  as 

indirect trust as it is determined by   recommendations [31].  

Figure 3. Indirect trust relationship 

 

The  reputation  of  B  will  influence  A’s  decisions  on  how 
much  trust  to  place  in  C.  If  there  were  many  nodes  linked  to 
both  A  and  C,  A  would  have  had  to  aggregate  all  the 
recommendations received on C using an algorithm. Important 
centrality metrics that have an effect on this situation is shortest 
path, network density and clustering coefficient.  

3) 

Shortest Path 

When indirect trust is computed, a number of paths may be 
found linking two nodes. The shortest path between two nodes 
in  a  social  graph  is  defined  as  the  geodesic  distance  between 
these  nodes according  to  the unit  length of  the  edges  [2]. The 
unit  of  length  is  the  weight  of  an  edge.  This  weight  is  not 
necessarily a distance measure but can also be, for example, the 
trust  level  of  the  relationship  [17].  In  terms  of  the  transitive 
trust  property  and  trust  propagation,  the  shorter  the  path 
between  two  nodes,  the  more  trustworthy  the  indirect  trust 
value will be [14] [17]. This is due to the fact that a node will 
trust its direct contacts more but the further away the nodes get, 
the  trust  value  of  these  nodes  will  be  less,  leading  to  a  less 
trustworthy recommendation. To be able to find a short path to 
other nodes the complete social network must be known. This 
measure  is  global  and  cannot  be  applied  to  a  locally  stored 
social network graph of an ego neighborhood. 

4) 

Density 

Density  is  the  number  of  connections  a  node  has,  divided 
by the number of possible connections [4].  Densely clustered 
networks  are  more  likely  to  lead  to  strong  trust  and  a  shared 
identity  [5]  [16]  [28].  This  leads  to  a  sense  of  community 
where these nodes can collaborate and cooperate by ensuring a 
self-enforcing  informal  governance  [12]  [28].  In  a  dense 
network,  agents  are  likely  to  receive  good  recommendations 
from  a  larger  number of other  agents [30].  Considering  figure 
1, community x has a high density and community z has a low 
density.  This  means  that  in  community  x  organisations  have 
formed  a  strong  community  where  they  have  high  trust  and 
reputation  established  due  to  the  alliances  and  collaborations 
that  are  continuously  formed.  Because  density  requires 
knowledge of the full network, it cannot be applied to a locally 
stored social network graph of an ego neighborhood.  

5) 

Clustering Coefficient 

A  node’s  clustering  coefficient  can  be  defined  as  the 
proportion of alters that are themselves directly connected [18] 
[28].  This  metric  therefore  quantifies  how  close  the  node’s 
graph is to becoming a cluster or, in social networking terms, a 

clique  [2].  This  can  be  used  in  ego  neighborhoods  such  as 
community  w  or  x  in  Figure  1,  to  determine  the  strongest 
community.  

As organisations collaborate with other  organisations, they 
form  stronger  trust  relationships  and  clusters  tend  to  form,  as 
shown  in  Figure  1  [28].  Clustering  increases  the  transmission 
efficiency in the network by giving nodes the ability to assess 
all the information received. [28]. If nodes are clustered in trust 
groups 
of 
recommendations  [11].  Clustering  can  form  strong  trusted 
communities where the organisations in these communities are 
collaborating  to  enhance  their  organisations  and  in-turn  the 
entire  community.  With  this  in  mind,  the  reputation  of  these 
organisations can be very accurate and reliable.  

this  would 

improve 

quality 

then 

the 

The  social  measures  discussed  so  far  have  been  used  in 
trust  and  reputation  systems.  There  are  more  social  network 
centrality  measures  that  have  not  been  exploited  for  trust  and 
computation, which are discussed next.  

IV.  INVESTIGATING UNEXPLOITED SOCIAL            

METRIC CENTRALITIES 

ratings 

Social  network 

centrality  measures 

centrality  must  pass 

indicate  how 
communication  happens  within  a  social  network.  It  identifies 
nodes that are in central positions within a social network. If a 
node  with  high 
and 
recommendations to others, there exists a risk that the node can 
compromise the information and behave opportunistically [10]. 
To  gain  more  power  in  a  Digital  Business  Ecosystem,  a  node 
may  fail  to pass  along all  important  information  to  nodes  that 
are dependent on this information.  The node may believe that 
it  would  be  worth  his  while  to  risk  his  position  of  power.  If 
other nodes should find this out, the node will in time lose his 
position  in  the  network.  The  node’s  centrality  therefore  will 
decline.    There  are  two  such  centrality  measures  to  be 
considered  namely  closeness  centrality  and  betweenness 
centrality.  Consider  Figure  4  from  [26].  Node  p  has  the  best 
closeness, whereas node h has the best betweenness.  

Figure 4. Centrality measures  

 

Not many trust and reputation systems specifically consider 
these measures in their computations. Their effect on trust and 
reputation is now discussed.  

A.  Closeness Centrality 

Freeman  identified  the  closeness  centrality  as  the  total 
distance to or from all other nodes, where distance refers to the 
number  of  links  along  the  shortest  path  [26].  Since  closeness 
measures  the  distance  to  all  other  nodes,  then  the  shorter  this 
distance is, the more central the node is [29].  

If nodes are central but  have low trust, information  should 
rather  flow  through  nodes  with  higher  trust  but  with  less 
centrality. This could lead to information taking longer and less 
efficient routes in the network [10]. Therefore, as a node’s trust 
gets  lower,  so  will  the  nodes  closeness  centrality,  because  the 
node will be bypassed so that a more trusted node can be used 
to transmit the information. Closeness is related to shortest path 
in  the  sense  that  if  a  node  is  closer  to  you,  the  indirect  trust 
values might be more accurate and reliable [29]. Unfortunately, 
closeness  centrality  is  uninformative  in  an  ego  neighborhood 
network because of the limitation on network size.  

B.  Betweenness Centrality 

Betweenness centrality is the measurement of the extent to 
which a node falls along a number of shortest paths connecting 
other pairs of nodes [3] [18] [7] [29]. Figure 4 clearly indicates 
that  node  h  is  such  a  node.  A  node  will  have  a  high 
betweenness value based on the extent to which it exists on the 
short  paths between  all other pairs of  nodes,  meaning  that  the 
node will have control over these paths  [3]. High betweenness 
nodes thus have the ability to facilitate interactions and control 
information between unconnected nodes [7].  

Nodes  with  high  betweenness  values  essentially  act  as 
―brokers‖ or ―bridges‖. This is due to the fact that there are no 
other  short  paths  that  can  bypass  this  node  with  a  high 
betweenness  [3].  Therefore  nodes  with  high  betweenness 
values  are  very  important  within  the  network  as  the  loss  of 
these  nodes  can  disrupt  the  structure  of  the  network  [29]. 
Should  a  node  with  a  high  betweenness  value  in  the  Digital 
Business  Ecosystem  social  network  no  longer be  in existence, 
this  would  impact  a  significant  number  of  organisations 
negatively. The positions of nodes m and n in Figure 1 clearly 
illustrate this. Should node m or n fail, there would be no path 
by  which  companies  in  the  different  clusters  could  connect 
with each other. This indicates how important these nodes are 
in establishing and maintaining a robust network structure.  

An interesting feature of betweenness is that it can be used 
in both  sociocentric and  egocentric  networks [7].   This  means 
that  regardless  of  how  the  network  and  the  trust  relationships 
are viewed, i.e. globally or locally, the betweenness value of a 
node can always be determined.  

The  presence  of  bridges  in  the  social  network  of  Digital 
Business  Ecosystem  present  more  business  opportunities  to 
ensure that the Digital Business Ecosystem grows and evolves 
to become more competitive. The question is what is the effect 
of these central positions on trust and reputation? Betweenness 
centrality has been addressed in the analysis of various topics, 
such  as 
transportation,  social  networks,  and  biological 
networks, but to  the best of  the  knowledge of the  researchers, 
no real work has specifically addressed betweenness centrality 
with  reputation  except  for  the  work  of  Delaviz,  Andrade  and 
Pouwelse [36]. They use the betweenness centrality of nodes in 

the  BarterCast  reputation  mechanism  that  is  used  by  a 
Bittorent-based 
to  compute 
reputation  not  from  the  perspective  of  a  node,  but  from  the 
perspective of the node with the highest betweenness centrality.  

file-sharing  client  Tribler 

The  researchers  believe  that  betweenness  centrality  is  an 
unexploited social network analysis measure that  indicates the 
importance  of  a  node 
in  a  network  where  reputation 
mechanisms should treat such nodes differently because of the 
central role that they can play.   

The  next  section  describes  a  basic  trust  and  reputation 
framework,  taking  into  account  the  nature  of  Digital  Business 
Ecosystems.  

V.  A FRAMEWORK FOR DIGITAL BUSINESS 

ECOSYSTEM TRUST AND REPUTATION 

A  Digital  Business  Ecosystem  framework  for  trust  and 
reputation  is  now  defined  based  on  the  research  identified  in 
this  paper.  Basic  assumptions  and  the  approach  are  defined. 
The  manner  in  which  both  current  and  unexploited  centrality 
measures can be used for trust and reputation is described. The 
Digital  Business  Ecosystem  social  graph  is  defined  by  the 
topology  shown  in  Figure  1.  This  is  the  global  view  of  the 
social network graph, not visible to any single node or central 
party.  Every  participant,  either  a  VSE  or  SME  being  either  a 
consumer or  service,  is represented by  an  agent. These  agents 
each build a local graph of its ego neighborhood as it interacts 
with other  agents. The agents follow a local and decentralised 
approach  to  trust  and  reputation.  Although  agents  act  in  a 
decentralised  way,  clusters  tend  to  form,  resulting  in  strong 
trust communities.  

In  Digital  Business  Ecosystem  there  are  nodes  who  are 
interested  in  building  communities.  They  are  represented  by 
super-agents,  called  community  managers  [34],  who  collect 
and  build  reputation  of  services  in  their  community.  Such 
reputations  are  provided  to  any  the  agents  of  a  prospective 
consumer of a service. In community x in Figure 1, Supplier B 
may  be  such  a  node.  Super-agents  are  discovered  through 
searches  if  agents  of  consumers  want  to  use  any  services 
provided  in  community  x.  Super-agents  follow  a  centralized 
approach to reputation, thereby ensuring a hybrid approach for 
reputation management for a Digital Business Ecosystem.  

At  a  community  level,  direct  trust  values  between  the 
agents of consumers and those of nodes providing services are 
used to determine trust. Degree and tie strength centralities are 
used  to  provide  a  more  accurate  measure  of  the  trust  in  an 
agent  of  a  node.  The  super-agent  thus  uses  the  direct  trust 
values of agents of consumers to determine the reputation for a 
specific  agent  of  a  node.  Between  communities,  super-agents 
may  become  aware  of  a  much  larger  network  graph  requiring 
the use of shortest path calculations.  

The  trust  in  a  community  as  a  whole  is  important  to 
consider  and  is  determined by  agents of  consumer  nodes. The 
clustering coefficient of a super-agent gives an indication of the 
strength  of  the  community.  Super-agents  need  to  behave 
trustworthy  to  be  able  to  attract  more  consumers  to  its 
community, 
community. 
Consumers  give  a  weight  to  the  super-agent’s  reputation 
information about the nodes in its community.  

thereby  building 

a 

stronger 

In these environments, super-agents exert a large amount of 
power  and  control  on  the  flow  of  information  in  the 
environment.  A  super-agent  may  be  a  broker  between  agents 
who  are  in  different  communities.  The  network  centrality  of 
super-agents  thus  needs  to  be  taken  into  account  when  their 
trust  and  reputation  is  determined.  The  main  focus  of  this 
research is to identify how betweenness centrality can be used 
to  enhance  Digital  Business  Ecosystem  trust  and  reputation. 
Higher  betweenness  centrality  means  a  higher  contribution  of 
the  node  in  connecting  other  nodes,  and  a  higher  flow  that 
passes through it. 

The  following  observations  provide  more  motivation  for 

the focus of this research:  

  Super-agents with high betweenness generally regard others 
as  more  trustworthy  as  those  who  are  in  peripheral 
positions, due to their relative control over the community.  

 

If a super-agent has higher betweenness than others, and is 
highly  trusted  by  agents  of  consumer  nodes,  it  should  be 
treated with care as not to lose its benefits.   

  The  power  that  a  super-agent  exerts  over  the  environment 
should be carefully considered when trust and reputation is 
computed and used.  

  A  super-agent  can  provide  reliable  recommendations  for  a 
greater  number  of  nodes,  thus,  enabling  collaboration 
opportunities for highly detached nodes in the network. 

To  date  little  research  has  been  done  to  determine  how 
betweenness  centrality  can  enhance  Digital  Business 
Ecosystem  trust  and  reputation.  Research  needs  to  be  done  to 
evaluate  the  effect  of  betweenness  when  combined  with  trust 
and reputation computations. This could be valuable for Digital 
Business Ecosystems who follow a hybrid approach as the loss 
of  trust  in  these  nodes  could  lead  to  the  deterioration  of 
communities.  This  is  of  importance  in  Digital  Business 
Ecosystems  where  nodes  such  as  VSEs  and  SMEs  need  to 
survive and generate profit in a competitive environment.  

There  is  much  future  research  to  be  done.  Next  this 
research  aims  to  focus  on  investigating  various  betweenness 
centrality  computations  to  determine  the  best  one  to  use  for 
Digital  Business  Ecosystem  trust  and  reputation.  Simulations 
will  be  performed  to  experiment  with  betweenness  centrality 
and its influence on trust and reputation.  

VI.  CONCLUSION 

This  paper  gives  a  background  on  Digital  Business 
Ecosystems  and  how  trust and  reputation are  to be  considered 
in  conjunction  with  social  network  centrality  measures.  A 
contribution  is  made  by  the  discussion  of  social  network 
centrality  measures  in  conjunction  with  trust  and  reputation. 
Social  network  centrality  metrics  such  as  degree,  tie  strength, 
shortest  path,  clustering  coefficient,  and  density  are  identified 
and  their  effect  on  trust  and  reputation  considered.  Two 
important  and  popular  social  network  centralities,  not  yet 
considered  for  trust  and  reputation  are  identified  namely 
closeness  and  betweenness  centrality.  Of  these,  betweenness 
centrality  is  identified  an  unexploited  measure  that  should  be 
researched. Finally, a basic framework was defined that shows 

how social network metrics can be used to support a hybrid and 
local  approach  to  Digital  Business  Ecosystem  trust  and 
reputation.  Future  research  aims  to  investigate  the  effect  of 
betweenness  centrality  in  the  formation  and  growth  of  trusted 
communities.    

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

The  support  of  SAP  Research  Pretoria/Meraka  Unit 
of  Technology  Development  and  the  National  Research 
Foundation  (NRF)  under  Grant  number  66302  towards  this 
research  is  hereby  acknowledged.  Opinions  expressed  and 
conclusions  arrived  at  are  solely 
the  authors 
and 
SAP 
be 
Research/Meraka UTD or the NRF. 

those  of 
attributed 

necessarily 

cannot 

to 

REFERENCES 

[1] 

J.  Bentahar,  B.  Khosravifar,  and  M.  Gomrokchi,  M,  ―Social  network-
based  trust  for  agent-based  services,‖  WAINA  '09  Proceedings  of  the 
2009  International  Conference  on  Advanced  Information  Networking 
and Applications Workshops,  pp. 298-303. 

[2]  C.C. Bilgin, ―Dynamic network evolution: models , clustering , anomaly 

detection‖, Technical Report, 2008, Rensselaer University, NY 

[3]  S.P.  Borgatti,  ―On  social  network  analysis  in  a  supply  chain  context,‖ 
University  of  Kentucky,  Journal  of  Supply  Chain  Management,  45(2), 
pp. 1-17. 

[4]  V.  Buskens,  ―The  social  structure  of  trust,‖  Social  Networks,  Volume 

20, Issue 3, July 1998, Pages 265-289 

[5] 

J.S.  Coleman,  ―Social  capital  in  the  creation  of  human  capital,‖  The 
American Journal of Sociology, 94, pp.95–120. 

[6]  D. McKnight, and N. Chervany, ―The Meanings of Trust,‖ University of 
Minnesota,  Management  Information  Systems  Reseach  Center,  Tech, 
Rep, MISRC Working Paper Series 96-04, 1996. 

[7]  E.M.  Daly,  and  M.  Haahr,  ―Social  network  analysis  for  routing  in 
disconnected  delay-tolerant  MANETs,‖  Proceedings  of  the  8th  ACM 
international symposium on Mobile ad hoc networking and computing - 
MobiHoc ’07, 32, New York, New York, USA, ACM Press. 

[8]  Z.  Despotovic,  ―Building  trust-aware  P2P  systems:  from  trust  and 

reputation management to decentralised e-commerce applications‖. 

[9]  F.  Dong,  L.  Huang, W.  Yang,  Y.  Zhu, and  J. Wang,  ―A  general  model 
for  trust  and  reputation  systems,‖  Computer  Science  and  Information 
Technology  (ICCSIT),  2010  3rd  IEEE  International  Conference,  vol.4,  
pp.454-459, 9-11 July 2010. 

[10]  S.  Droege,  L.C.  Dong,  ―The  Centrality  Efficiency  Index:  a  new  social 
network analysis measure,‖ Review of Business Research, 2007 Volume 
VII, Number 2, pp.164-170. 

[11]  T. Dubois, C. Park, and J. Kleint, ―Improving recommendation accuracy 
by clustering social networks with trust,‖  In ACM RecSys'09 Workshop 
on Recommender Systems & the Social Web (October 2009) . 

[12]  J.H.  Dyer,  H.  Singh,  ―The  relational  view:  Cooperative  strategy  and 
advantage,‖  Acad. 

interorganizational 

competitive 

sources  of 
Management Rev. 23, pp.  660–679. 

[13]  L.C. Freeman, ―Centrality in social networks: Conceptual clarification,‖ 

Social Networks, 1979. 

[14]  J.  Golbeck,  ―Computing  with 

trust:  Definition,  properties,  and 

algorithms,‖ 2006 Securecomm and Workshops, 1. 

[15]  M.  Granovetter,  "The  strength  of  weak  ties,"  American  Journal  of 

Sociology, 1973, 78, pp.1360 1380. 

[16]  M.  Granovetter,  ―Problems  of  explanation  in  economic  sociology,‖  N. 
Nohria,  R.  Eccles,  eds,  Networks  and  Organizations:  Structure,  Form, 
and Action. Harvard Business School Press, Boston, MA, pp. 25–56. 

[17]  C. Hang, Y. Wang, and M.P. Singh, ―Operators for propagating trust and 
their  evaluation  in  social  networks,‖  Proc.  of  8th  Int.  Conf.  on 

 

Autonomous  Agents  and  Multiagent  Systems  (AAMAS  2009),  pp. 
1025-1032. 

[18]  A. Hupa, R. Krzysztof, A. Wierzbicki, D. Anwitaman, ―Interdisciplinary 
matchmaking: Choosing  collaborators  by  skill, acquaintance  and  trust,‖ 
Computational Social Network Analysis. 

[19]  M.  Ion,  A.  Danzi,  H.  Koshutanski,  and  L.  Telesca,  ―A  peer-to-peer 
multidimensional  trust  model  for  digital  ecosystems,‖  2008  2nd  IEEE 
International  Conference  on  Digital  Ecosystems  and  Technologies,  pp. 
461-469. 

[20]  A.  Jøsang,  R.  Ismail,  and  C.  Boyd,  "A  survey  of  trust  and  reputation 
systems for online service provision," Decision Support Systems, 43(2), 
pp. 618-644. 

[21]  A.  Jøsang,  E.  Gray,  and M.  Kinateder,  M.  ―Simplification and  analysis 

of transitive trust networks,‖ Data Communications, pp. 1-26. 

[22]  G.  Liu, Y. Wang, and M.A. Orgun, ―Optimal social trust path selection 

in complex social networks,‖ Artificial Intelligence, pp. 1391-1398. 

[23]  M.  Lurgi,  and  F.  Estanyol,  ―MADBE  :  a  Multi-Agent  Digital  Business 
Ecosystem,‖    Digital  Ecosystems  and  Technologies  (DEST),  2010  4th 
IEEE International Conference, vol., no., pp.262-267, 13-16 April 2010. 

[24]  Y.  Matsuo,  and  H  Yamamoto,  H.  ―Community  gravity  :  Measuring 
bidirectional  effects  by  trust  and  rating  on  online  social  networks,‖ 
Social Networks, pp. 751-760. 

[25]  Z.  Noorian,  and M.  Ulieru,  ―The  state  of  the  art  in trust  and  reputation 
systems: A framework for comparison,‖ Electronic Commerce Research, 
5(2). 

[26]  D.  Ortiz-Arroyo,  ―Computational  Social  Network  Analysis,‖  (A. 

Abraham, A. E. Hassanien, & V. Snasel, Eds.). Springerlink. 

[27]  M.  Petrou,  S.  Gautam,  and  K.N.  Giannoutakis,  ―Simulating  a  digital 
business ecosystem,‖ Computational Finance and its Applications II, 43, 
pp. 277-287. Southampton, UK: WIT Press. 

[28]  M.A.  Schilling,  and  C.  Phelps,  ―Interfirm  collaboration  networks  :  The 
innovation,‖ 

large-scale  network  structure  on 

firm 

impact  of 
Management Science, 53(7), pp. 1113-1126. 

[29]  I.  Varlamis,  M.  Eirinaki,  and  M.  Louta,  ―A  Study  on  social  network 
metrics  and  their  application  in  trust  networks,‖  2010  International 
Conference on Advances in Social Networks Analysis and Mining, 168. 

[30]  F.E. Walter,  S. Battiston,  and  F.  Schweitzer,  ―A  model  of  a trust-based 
recommendation system on a social network,‖ Autonomous Agents and 
Multi-Agent Systems, 16(1), pp. 57-74. 

[31]  C.N. Ziegler, and G. Lausen, ―Propagation models for trust and distrust 
in social networks,‖ Information Systems Frontiers, 7(4-5), pp. 337-358. 

[32]  K. Zolfaghar, and A. Aghaie, ―Evolution of trust networks in social web 
applications using  supervised  learning,‖  Procedia  Computer  Science, 3, 
833.  and  Magnetism,  3rd  ed.,  vol.  2.  Oxford:  Clarendon,  1892,  pp.68–
73. 

[33]  Z. Gyongyi, H. Garcia-Molina, and J. Pedersen, ―Combating web spam 
with TrustRank,‖ In proceedings of the 30th International Conference on 
Very Large Data Bases, pp. 271–279. 

[34]  Y.  Wang,  J.  Zhang  and  J.  Vassileva,  ―Super-Agent  based  reputation 
management  with  a  practical  reward  mechanism  in  decentralised 
systems,‖  4th  IFIP  WG  11.11  International  Conference  on  Trust 
Management, June 14-18, 2010, Morioka, Iwate, Japan  

[35]  Avrachenkov  C,  Nemirovsky  D,  and  Pham  K.  2007.  A  survey  on 
to  graph  based  reputation  measures.  In 
distributed  approaches 
Proceedings  of  the  2nd  international  conference  on  Performance 
evaluation methodologies and tools (ValueTools '07). ICST (Institute for 
Computer  Sciences,  Social-Informatics  and  Telecommunications 
Engineering), ICST, Brussels, Belgium, Belgium, Article 82 , 9 pages. 

[36]  R.  Delaviz,  N.  Andrade,  &  J.  Pouwelse,  ―Improving  accuracy  and 
coverage  in  an  Internet-deployed  reputation  mechanism,‖  2010  IEEE 
Internation conference on Peer-to-Peer Computing(P2P),pp.0-8.  

[37]  Dini p, Nicolai A, The Digital Business Ecosystem, FP6 IST e-Business 

Integrated Project, http://www.digital-ecosystems.org /cluster/ dbe/ 
dbe_summary_cc.pdf 

