Exploring the human dimension of TETRA 

 

Nico Pieter Fouché 

Institute of ICT Advancement 

Nelson Mandela Metropolitan University 

Port Elizabeth, South Africa 

s207057396@live.nmmu.ac.za 

 

 
 

Dr. Kerry-Lynn Thomson 
Institute of ICT Advancement 

Nelson Mandela Metropolitan University 

Port Elizabeth, South Africa 

Kerry-Lynn.Thomson@nmmu.ac.za 

of 

critical 

protection 

information 

Abstract—In  order  to  secure  communication,  in  the 
year 55 BC, Julius Caesar developed the Caesar cipher 
to ensure his generals on the battle field received critical 
information in the most secure manner possible. Today, 
the 
and 
communication is just as vital. 
 
Police  officers,  fire  marshals  and  emergency  medical 
units require critical information to make decisions that 
could  mean  the  difference  between  life  and  death.  Just 
as  in  the  Caesar  era,  the  information  is  intended  for  a 
particular  recipient  and  can 
lead  to  devastating 
consequences if intercepted or received in a malformed 
state.  Security  of  these  communications  should  be  of 
utmost  importance.  One  of  the  threats  to  security  is 
Social  Engineering,  which  is  commonly  deployed  in 
computer  networks.  However,  Social  Engineering  need 
not be limited to computer networks. 
 
Terrestrial  Trunked  Radio  (TETRA)  is  a  standard 
intended  for  secure  professional  digital  mobile  radio 
communication,  designed 
for  use  by  government 
agencies,  emergency  services,  transportation  services 
and  various  other  users 
secure 
communication.  TETRA  is  seen  as  a  very  technically 
secure standard, making use of authentication keys and 
air interface encryption amongst other techniques. 
 
Even  though  TETRA  is  technically  secure,  are  the 
TETRA users safe from Social Engineering? This paper 
will investigate the potential of Social Engineering on a 
TETRA system. Further, the various vulnerabilities and 
possible escalation scenarios that could occur if TETRA 
users are not  made aware of Social Engineering will be 
explored. 
 
Security, 
Keywords-component; 
Engineering, Terrestrial Trunked Radio (TETRA) 
 

in  need  of 

Information 

Social 

I. 

INTRODUCTION 

The  security  of  digital  networks 
is  of  grave 
importance  in  the  society  we  live  in  today.  Our 
networks are under constant attack in attempt to gain 
information.  Organizations  have  information  they 
must  protect,  which 
its 
lifeblood.  Different  organizations  have  different 
information  to  protect,  for  example,  banks  have  the 

is  often  described  as 

the 

target 

to  acquire 

the  network 

information  and  could 

financial  information  of  customers.  The  information 
is  the  responsibility  of  the  bank  and  must  be 
protected  at  all  times.  An  attacker  could  attempt  to 
gain access to various levels of the bank‟s network to 
least 
gather 
protected  area  of 
the 
information wanted. As a protector of information all 
possible scenarios of exploitation must be considered 
in order to protect against it. Computer networks are 
being  used  in  almost  all  organizations  today,  so  the 
security  is  under  massive  pressure  to  be  kept  up  to 
date. In the context of computer networks security, it 
is  often  said  that  nothing  is  100  percent  secure  and 
according  to  Mitnick,  even  the  most  technically 
secure  computer  networks  (e.g.  CIA,  FBI,  MIT)  can 
be  cracked  with  knowledge  in  human  manipulation 
[1].  Similarly  to  computer  networks,  radio  networks 
also  have  sensitive  information  that  needs  to  be 
protected,  whether  it  is  being  stored  or  transmitted. 
Further,  in  a  radio  network  that  is  being  used  for 
public  safety  and  security,  for  example,  a  breach  in 
confidential information could be devastating. 

II.  TETRA 

to 

in 

improvements 

that  conforms 

radio  network 

One communication  standard that ensures  the secure 
transmission  of  data  over  radio  is  the  Terrestrial 
Trunked  Radio  or  TETRA  standard.  TETRA  is  a 
digital 
the 
requirements  of  a  Professional/Private  Mobile  Radio 
(PMR)  category  system.  Traditional  PMR  networks 
use  an  analog  form  of  communication.  TETRA 
provides  digital 
the  form  of 
integrated  voice  and  data  communication  and  the 
sharing  of  a  single  network  by  multiple  users. 
TETRA is a digital two-way  transceiver, using Time 
Division Multiple Access (TDMA) to allow multiple 
encrypted  speech  channels  for  communication  and 
can  be  both  point-to-point  and  point-to-multipoint, 
while allowing digital data transmission [2]. 
 
TETRA  is  currently  in  use  by  organizations  all 
around 
the  world.  Germany  has  a  nationwide 
adoption  of  TETRA  for  the  police,  fire  brigade, 
ambulance  and  coastal  guard  under  the  organization 

for 

services 

transportation 

BOSNET.  The  United  Kingdom  is  almost  complete 
with  the  full  roll  out  of  TETRA  networks  for  the 
police,  fire  brigade,  emergency  services  and  armed 
forces  under  the  organization  Airwave.  Further, 
CONNECT  is  a  TETRA  network  currently  being 
used 
in  London. 
According  to  the  2010  figures  compiled  by  TETRA 
association, networks using TETRA are found in 118 
countries around the world. In South Africa, TETRA 
was  used  by  the  Eastern  Cape  Police  for  secure 
digital  communication,  and  to  ensure  public  safety 
and  security,  in  the  Nelson  Mandela  Bay  Stadium 
during the FIFA 2010 Soccer World Cup. 
 
TETRA 
a  European  Telecommunications 
Standards  Institute  (ETSI)  standard,  which  has 
considered previous mobile communication standards 
and,  as  was  mentioned, 
is  used  extensively 
throughout the world. The standard allows for a wide 
spread  adoption,  creating  many  uses  for  TETRA; 
however this paper will focus on the aspect of public 
safety and security. 
 

is 

A.  ATETRA Network 

interfaces  and 

As  mentioned,  TETRA  is  a  suite  of  standards  that 
cover  various  aspects  of  a  digital  network,  like  air 
interfaces,  network 
the  TETRA 
services  and  facilities.  Figure  1  illustrates  these 
aspects  in  a  common  TETRA  network,  as  found  in 
the  TETRA  Release 
from 
TETRAMOU, an association of TETRA specialists. 
 

information 

1 

 

Figure 1. TETRA Network Overview [3] 

 
The  first  aspect  to  consider  is  the  Switching  and 
Management Infrastructure (SwMI). SwMI is used to 
classify  all  the  equipment  and  sub-systems  in  a 
TETRA  network.  The  SwMI  includes  Base  Stations 
(BS),  Gateways,  Controllers  and  Inter  System 
Interface  (ISI).  The  SwMi  also  has  interfaces  to  the 
Network  Manager,  local  dispatchers  and  external 

in  Figure  1 

Public  Switched  Telephone  Networks  (PSTN).  The 
ISI  enables  inter-operation  between  other  SwMI‟s. 
The  BS  provides  air  interfaces  between  the  SwMI 
and the TETRA terminals, although the terminal can 
have  its  own  optional  air  interface  with  another 
terminal  in  Direct  Mode  Operation  (DMO).  Number 
4 
indicates  Peripheral  Equipment 
Interface (PEI), which standardizes the connection of 
the radio terminal to an external device. PEI supports 
data  transmission  between  applications  installed  on 
the device and the connected TETRA terminal. Local 
dispatchers  are  commonly  found  in  a  dispatcher 
center, indicated by the number 5 in Figure 1 [3]. 
 
Dispatchers  can  monitor,  record,  terminate,  join  and 
initiate  calls  to  users  with  TETRA  terminals.  In 
addition,  dispatchers  can  monitor  the  location  of 
TETRA  terminals  and  also  make  a  forced  call  to  a 
terminal  that  will  not  ring  or  notify  the  user  of  the 
terminal,  allowing  the  dispatcher  to  listen  in  on  the 
terminal.  A  dispatcher  will  typically  receive  an 
emergency  call  from  TETRA  users  in  an  emergency 
and  can  patch  them  through  to  relevant  emergency 
services  if  needed.  Through  the  network  discussed 
above,  TETRA  provides  critical  information  for  the 
services  we  depend  on  in  society,  namely  the  public 
safety and security services. 
 

B.  TETRA Adoption 

the 

invested 

latest  TETRA 

in  a  brand  new 

Training facilities can be found all around the world, 
but  currently  the  only  facility  found  on  the  African 
continent  is  at  the  Nelson  Mandela  Metropolitan 
University.  INTEGCOMM  and  EADS  Defense  & 
Security 
top  class 
infrastructure at the  university,  which is used for the 
various  courses  of  training  on  campus  and  for  The 
SAPS  Eastern  Cape  TETRA  Project. The  mentioned 
project  aims  to  equip  the  Eastern  Cape  of  South 
Africa  with 
technology  for 
improved  secure  digital  communication  for  police 
officers.  The  facility  for  training  is  known  as  the 
TETRA  Academy,  which  is  the  first  and  only  of  its 
kind  internationally,  that  offers  TETRA  training  in 
collaboration with a Higher Education institution. 
 
The  courses  include  various  aspects,  for  example 
System Course, End User System Course, Dispatcher 
Workstation  and  Base  Station.  The  courses  stretch 
from understanding how the TETRA system works to 
educating  dispatchers  how  the  system  operates  and 
assisting  technical  staff  with  being  responsible  for 
commissioning  and  maintaining  the  TETRA  Base 
Stations  in  the  network.  The  above  mentioned 
transfer  critical 
training  educates 

students 

to 

information  safely  and  securely  over  the  TETRA 
network [4]. 
 
It must be noted that the TETRA training mentioned 
above  is  of  a  technical  nature  and  teaches  users  of 
TETRA how to operate various equipment. 
 

C.  Security 

safety  and 

through 

Confidentiality, 

security.  Therefore, 

As discussed in previously, the communications over 
a TETRA network are typically of a crucial nature for 
public 
these 
communications  must  be  secured.  TETRA  provides 
security 
Integrity, 
Authentication, Availability and Accountability using 
Mutual  Authentication,  Air  Interface  Encryption 
(AIE)  and  End 
to  End  encryption.  Mutual 
Authentication  is  a  service  that  allows  the  TETRA 
system  to  control  access  to  the  network.  A  TETRA 
Subscriber  Identity  Module  (SIM)  can  be  used  to 
uniquely  identify  terminals,  providing  control  of 
which  terminals  may  access  the  TETRA  network. 
Another  important  service  addresses  the  encryption 
of communication between the TETRA radio devices 
is  AIE.  AIE  ensures  that  communication  over  the 
„air‟,  for  example,  from  dispatcher  to  terminal,  is 
encrypted.  AIE  supports  four  different  TETRA 
Encryption  Algorithms 
(TEAs),  namely  TEA1, 
TEA2,  TEA3  and  TEA4.  The  AIE  protects  all 
signaling  and  identities,  including  user  speech  and 
data [5].  
 
TETRA also supports End to End encryption using a 
variety of encryption algorithms that are specified by 
the  organization.  TETRA  provides  recommended 
solutions 
form  of 
International Data Encryption Algorithm (IDEA) and 
the  newer  Advanced  Encryption  Standard  (AES) 
algorithm  for  End  to  End  encryption.  TETRA  also 
provides  a  wide  range  of  security  management 
capabilities  to  control,  manage  and  operate  the 
individual security mechanisms in a network [5]. 
 
Therefore,  TETRA  is  considered  very  technically 
secure  as  the  actual  data  is  intrinsically  very  well 
protected  as  it  is  transmitted.  However,  there  seems 
to  be  very  little  research  or  focus  on  the  human 
dimension of TETRA. 
 

for  organizations 

in 

the 

III.  HUMAN DIMENSION OF SECURITY 

For most organizations, the protection of information 
assets  is  of  vital  importance.  In  order  to  secure 
information  assets,  various  controls  are  used. 
Controls  are  typically  identified  as  being  physical, 
technical or operational. Physical controls include the 

use of patrolling guards, security gates and locks and 
provide  physical  protection.  In  order  to  bypass 
physical  controls 
the  employees  must  provide 
necessary  identification  or  keys.  Physical  controls 
allow  for  very  little  room  for  exploitation  when 
implemented properly. The next category of controls 
identifies  devices  that  provide  technical  controls  for 
information. Technical controls usually have physical 
controls to protect them. A simple example is the use 
of  a  firewall  to  prohibit  unauthorized  entry  via 
technology  from  remote  destinations.  The 
last 
category  of  controls  considers  the  human  dimension 
in  daily  operation,  namely  operational  controls. 
Organizations  can  develop  education,  activities  or 
policies  to  attempt  to  control  the  human  aspect  of 
information  [6].  Mitnick  proved  to  the  US  Congress 
that  he  could  often  obtain  passwords  or  other  pieces 
of sensitive information by just asking for it. Mitnick 
explains that he used various forms of persuasion and 
manipulation over telephone lines to exploit the most 
technically  advanced  security  systems.  Security  is 
only  as  secure  as  the  weakest  link;  and  the  human 
dimension is often considered the weakest link [1]. 
 

A.  Social Engineering 

Social  Engineering  is  often  used  to  exploit  this 
human  dimension.  Social  Engineering  is  a  non-
technical  form  of  intrusion  that  relies  heavily  on 
social  interaction.  A  person  that  exercises  Social 
Engineering  is  considered  a  hacker.  Like  any  other 
person,  a  hacker  shares  the  human  goals  of  money, 
social advancement, and self-worth [7]. 
 
Social Engineering uses the power of persuasion and 
manipulation  to  divulge  sensitive  information  that  a 
victim  believes  should  be  provided  to  the  hacker. 
Typically,  a  Social  Engineering  victim  does  not 
realize  he/she  has  been  hacked  until  a  good  while 
later.  The  following  subsections  will  describe  some 
of 
identified  by  Microsoft‟s 
whitepaper  [7]  as  can  be  related  to  Mitnick‟s  work 
[1]. 

techniques 

these 

 
Intimidation 
The  attacker 
impersonates  an  authority 
figure  in  the  relevant  organization  or  a 
superior  in  an  organization  (e.g.  officers  of 
the law). Intimidation proves as an easy way 
to  force  a  target  to  comply  with  the  request 
by using mild threats. 
 
Persuasion 
Persuasion  is  the  act  of  influencing  a  target 
by  means  of  argumentation  or 
false 
reasoning.  This  technique  requires  good 

the 

forms 

attacker 

experience  with  social  interaction  to  detect 
the hidden agenda of the attacker. 
 
Ingratiation 
This  technique  is  based  on  a  longer  term 
attack,  where 
a 
relationship with the victim to gain trust and 
encourages  the  victim  to  eventually  divulge 
information. 
 
Assistance 
The  social  engineer  attempts  to  assist  the 
victim. The notion of assistance can build a 
short  term  relationship  between  the  hacker 
information 
and  victim, 
vulnerability.  The 
uses 
that 
vulnerability to divulge information. 
 

in 
hacker 

resulting 

The  techniques  listed  above  are  just  a  few  of  the 
more  common  examples  of  the  many  techniques  a 
social  engineer  could  use  to  obtain  unauthorized 
information [7].  
 

B.  Exploitation through Social Engineering 

and 

to 

real 

threat 

related 

software 

computing 

is  a  very 

lot  of  sensitive 

in 
Social  Engineering 
Information  Technology  and 
there  are  many 
examples  of  Social  Engineering  attacks  where 
information  has  been  compromised.  Below  are 
examples  of  Social  Engineering  attacks  relevant  to 
the  techniques  identified  in  the  previous  sections; 
intimidation, persuasion, ingratiation and assistance.   
Consider  an  organization  with  an  Information 
Technology  (IT)  Helpdesk.  The  IT  Helpdesk  is  a 
taskforce that specializes in troubleshooting problems 
in 
the 
organization. This taskforce, perhaps unknown to the 
employees,  has  a 
information 
available  about  the  fellow  employees.  A  hacker  can 
intimidate the employees at the helpdesk by claiming 
to  be  a  superior.  The  hacker  can  then  request 
information 
employee‟s 
occupation.  A  sensitive  or  perhaps  new  employee, 
who has been trained to be helpful and friendly, will 
feel obliged  to provide the expected information and 
will then be unknowingly hacked. This is a common 
form of intimidation Social Engineering. 
 
The mentioned IT Helpdesk can also be the target for 
a  persuasion  Social  Engineering  attack.  The  hacker 
can physically approach the helpdesk under the guise 
of  an  employee  in  the  building.  Through  various 
clever forms of argumentation or even a sympathetic 
approach  the  hacker  could  persuade  the  helpdesk 
employee  into  resetting  an  account  for  the  hacker. 
Alternatively, the hacker may telephone the helpdesk 

threatening 

by 

the 

forming 

relationships  with 

employee  and  use  persuasion  techniques  to  acquire 
information.  In many cases, all the hacker requires is 
a  name  and  surname  which  could  be  acquired 
through  an  easily  obtained  company 
telephone 
directory.   
 
A  rather  difficult  form  of  Social  Engineering  is  the 
use  of  a  long  term  plan,  as  a  lot  more  dedication  is 
required from the hacker. This attack is known as the 
ingratiation  Social  Engineering  attack.  Consider  a 
hacker  that  applies  for  a  janitor  position  at  a 
company, 
fellow 
colleagues  over  a  short  period  of  time,  for  example 
two  to  three  months.  The  hacker  now  has  a  good 
relationship,  causing  the  hack  to  be  a  lot  easier.  A 
friend  will  assist  a  colleague  that  is  having  trouble 
with logging into the network, for example. A friend 
will  also  allow  a  colleague  to  be  alone  in  a  room 
while  cleaning  it,  as  the  relationship  includes  trust, 
allowing  the  hacker  to  complete  his  hidden  task  of 
compromising the network. 
 
When  a  person  is  assisted  with  a  problem,  they 
usually become thankful. A short term relationship is 
then formed between the two people that interacted in 
solving the particular problem. A hacker  can pose as 
a person who may assist you in your problem, which 
in turn provides the hacker with the upper hand when 
attempting  to  hack  information  from  the  person  in 
need. For example, a hacker could purposefully cause 
a  network  or  computer  issue  and  then  contact  the 
affected person to offer assistance in fixing the issue. 
When  the  hacker  contacts  the  person  again  and  asks 
them  to  download  a  program  for  his/her  computer, 
for  example,  the  person  will  be  more  inclined  to 
assist  the  hacker.This  is  a  form  of  assistance  Social 
Engineering attack. 
 
The  examples  described  can  all  be  related  to  IT 
environments,  but  the  techniques  used  are  not  solely 
meant  for  hacking  IT  environments.  The  following 
examples will attempt to sketch scenarios in TETRA 
networks  that  could  have  happened  during  the  FIFA 
2010  Soccer  World  Cup  at  the  Nelson  Mandela  Bay 
Stadium with the South African Police. 
 
The  dispatcher  center  is  normally  a  room  filled  with 
dispatcher  stations  and  dispatchers.  Dispatchers 
control and  monitor various calls  in the  network,  for 
example  an  emergency  call  from  a  South  African 
Police  (SAP)  officer  will  be  immediately  answered 
by a dispatcher and required services will be notified, 
be  it  emergency  medical  units  or  even  the  fire 
brigade.  This  room  is  filled  with  information  about 
TETRA  subscribers  and  external  services.  A  hacker 
couldassume  the  guise  as  a  chief  technical  advisor 

the 

in 

result 

limitless 

task.From 

the  hidden 

with a legitimate looking TETRA badge and tailgate 
his  way  into  the  room.  The  hacker  could  then 
intimidate  a  dispatcher  into  relieving  their  position 
behind  a  dispatcher  station,  allowing  the  hacker  to 
complete 
the  dispatcher 
workstation,  the  hacker  could  compromise  many 
areas  of  the  TETRA  network,  and  consequently 
public  safety  and  security.    For  example,  the  hacker 
could  acquire 
location  of  specific  TETRA 
terminals  or  even  install  intelligent  software  code  to 
compromise the dispatching station remotely. Control 
over a dispatcher‟s computer can be considered as the 
ultimate  compromise  in  a  TETRA  network,  as  the 
consequent  scenarios  are 
terms  of 
exploitation. 
 
The FIFA 2010 Soccer World Cup generated a lot of 
job  opportunities  for  various  services  during  the 
tournament.  The  tournament  required  an  increase  in 
for  public  safety  and  security.  New 
officers 
employees 
in  various  occupations  pose  as  an 
advantageous  target  for  Social  Engineering  hackers, 
as a slight increase in emotion is expected in the new 
environment.  This  could 
in  a  slightly 
pressurized  environment  for  the  new  officers,  more-
so as an influx of people locally and from all over the 
world  was  expected.  A  hacker  can  easily  use 
persuasion  Social  Engineering  attack  on  these  new 
officers,  allowing  him  to  collect  a  TETRA  handheld 
terminal that is live on the network.  
 
A similar scenario to the IT ingratiation can be used 
for  TETRA.  As  mentioned,  during  the  FIFA  2010 
Soccer World Cup  many new employees were hired. 
A  hacker  could  have  easily  become,  for  example,  a 
janitor.    Clever  placement  could  land  the  hacker  in 
the  same  building  as  the  new  TETRA  dispatching 
center,  allowing  him  unrestricted  access.  The  hacker 
can  also 
relationships  with  other  new 
employees, resulting in a considerable easier hack at 
the cost of a bit more time. 
 
As  mentioned  previously,  the  FIFA  2010  Soccer 
World  Cup  welcomed  an  increase  in  various  job 
opportunities.  Similarly  to  the  IT  assistance  Social 
Engineering attack, a hacker can attempt to assist one 
of  the  new  SAP  officers  with  potential  technical 
issues on their TETRA terminal. On agreement of the 
newly  appointed  SAP  officer,  the  hacker  is  allowed 
to inspect the terminal  by possibly plugging it into a 
laptop  for  “closer  inspection”.  TETRA  terminals 
have  a  Subscriber  Identity  Module  (SIM),  which 
forms part of the technical security in TETRA and is 
physically  located  in  the  terminal.  This  provides 
authentication  to the TETRA  radio network and  will 
allow  the  hacker  to  exploit  the  network  once  copied 

form 

or  stolen  after  assisting  the  new  SAP  officer  with 
inspection of his terminal. 
 

C.  Social Engineering Awareness in TETRA  

inside 

Many  computer  networks  are  considered  very 
technically  secure.    These  computing  networks  have 
the  latest  devices  to  ensure  security,  for  example 
Cisco ASA firewall products to prohibit unauthorized 
remote  access  and  hardware  encryption  modules  for 
superior  confidentiality 
the  network.  As 
discussed  earlier,  Social  Engineering  has  been  used 
to exploit users of computing devices. Therefore, the 
original  target  of  exploiting  the  network  has  shifted 
from attacking technical security controls to the users 
of  the  computing  network  in  order  to  bypass  highly 
sophisticated security techniques. 
 
Similarly, TETRA digital networks address the needs 
of the PMR users, providing security services such as 
End  to  End  encryption,  Mutual  Authentication  and 
Air Interface Encryption. TETRA is a technologically 
secure  form  of  communication,  with  little  room  for 
technical exploitation.  Further, just as hacking in the 
computing  environment  has  largely  shifted  from 
technical  hacking  to  Social  Engineering;  it  can  be 
argued  that  a  TETRA  environment  could  be  subject 
to the same Social Engineering issues.  
 
In  computer  environments,  Social  Engineering 
Training  and  Awareness  is  often  used  to  attempt  to 
educate  users  about 
typical  Social  Engineering 
attacks for increased security of computing networks. 
As  has  been  mentioned,  TETRA 
training  and 
education  focuses  primarily  on  the  technical  aspects 
and usage of TETRA networks. It can be argued that, 
just as Social Engineering Training and Awareness is 
needed  in  a  computing  environment,  so  too  does 
TETRA 
focus  on  Social 
Engineering  Training  and  Awareness.This  would 
attempt  to  ensure  the  users  of  the  TETRA  networks 
are  aware  of  potential  Social  Engineering  attacks, 
which could ensure public safety and security. 
 

require  a 

training 

IV.  CONCLUSION 

Even  though  a  TETRA  network 
is  considered 
technically secure, it is vital for the users to be aware 
of  potential  Social  Engineering  attacks.  Social 
Engineering  in  a  TETRA  network  could  potentially 
lead  to  confidential  information  being  compromised 
and,  consequently,  compromise  public  safety  and 
security.  In  order  to  protect  the  network  against 
Social  Engineering  attacks,  the  users  of  the  network 
must  be  educated.  Therefore,  a  Social  Engineering 

should  be 
Training  and  Awareness  program 
developed and tailored specifically for TETRA users.  
 

REFERENCES 

[1]  Mitnick,  K.  D.,  &  Simon,  W.  L.  (2002).  The  Art  of 
Deception: Controlling the Human Element of Security. 
United States of America: Wiley Publishing, Inc. 

[2]  Stavroulakis,  P.  (2007).  Terrestrial  trunked  radio  - 

TETRA: a global security tool. Berlin: Springer. 

[3]  TETRA.  (2011).  TETRA  Release  1.  Retrieved  May  1, 
TETRAMOU: 

2011, 
http://www.tetramou.com/tetramou.aspx?id=1181 

from 

[4]  Nelson  Mandela  Metropolitan  University.  (2011). 
TETRA  ACADEMY:  Educating  the  Workforce  of  a 
Networked  Economy  [Brochure].  South  Africa:  Nelson 
Mandela Metropolitan University. 

[5]  TETRA.  (2011).  TETRA  Security.  Retrieved  May  1, 
TETRAMOU: 

2011, 
http://www.tetramou.com/tetra_print.aspx?id=1184 

from 

[6]  Whitman, M. E., & Mattord, H. J. (2003). Principles of 
Information  Security.  Canada:  Thomson  Course 
Technology. 

[7]  Microsoft. (2006). How to Protect Insiders From Social 
Engineering  Threats.  Retrieved  April  14,  2011,  from 
Microsoft 
Center: 
http://www.microsoft.com/downloads/en/details.aspx?F
amilyID=05033E55-AA96-4D49-8F57-
C47664107938&amp%3Bdisplaylang=en 

Download 

 

