Factors Affecting User Experience with Security 
Features: A Case Study of an Academic Institution 

in Namibia 

Fungai Bhunu Shava 

PhD I.T. student Nelson Mandela Metropolitan University 

Lecturer Polytechnic of Namibia 

Windhoek, Namibia 

fbshava@polytechnic.edu.na 

Abstract 
The widespread use of personal computers and other devices 
based on Information and Communication Technology (ICT) for 
networking and communication via the Internet exposes the end 
users  to  cybercriminals.  Security  systems  and  security  features 
that  interact  with  users  via  alerts,  dialogue  boxes  and  action 
buttons  (such  as  update  notices  and  other  warnings)  are 
embedded  in  operating  systems  and  application  programs  in 
order  to  protect  electronic  information.  Human  behaviour  and 
attitudes towards security features determine the user experience 
during  the  implementation  of  Information  Security.  Cyber 
criminals  are  primarily  targeting  the  human  aspect  of  security, 
since end  users  are  easier  to manipulate.  In order  to  effectively 
secure  information,  the  fields  of  Usable  security  and  User 
experience should be integrated in the design and use of security 
features.  This  paper  presents  the  findings  of  an  online  survey 
carried out to investigate attitudes towards, behaviour with and 
experience  of  embedded  security  features  among  members  of 
staff  in  a  tertiary  education  institution.  User  experience  was 
measured  by  enumerating  general  security  awareness,  policy 
awareness  and  implementation,  as  well  as  user  behaviour  and 
emotions associated with security interaction. This paper reports 
on the findings of this survey. The researchers envisage that the 
findings 
the  practical  development  and 
implementation of a framework for secure user experience.  

lead 

can 

to 

Keywords-  user  experience;  user  behaviour;  security  feature; 

end user application program. 

I. 

 INTRODUCTION 

Technology  is  shaping  global  behaviour  by  dictating  how 
players  must  behave  in  order  to  survive  the  information 
technology  age.  Almost  every  job  and  communication  now 
depends on information technology and is carried out with the 
aid  of  some  application  programs.  Advancements  in  both 
system design and communication technologies have presented 
an opportunity for all to be interconnected. More end users are 
now connected to the Internet, including cybercriminals. This 
is enabled by the use of a variety of devices, some of which are 
mobile devices. Computers are now an integral component in 
homes  and  businesses,  including  in  academic  institutions  like 

Professor Darelle Van Greunen     

Faculty of Engineering, Built Enviroment and ICT, School 
of ICT, Institute for ICT Advancement, Nelson Mandela 

Metropolitan University       
Port Elizabeth, South Africa 

Darelle.vanGreunen@nmmu.ac.za 

the  one  that  was  studied.    Due  to  readily  available  network 
access, Africa has realised high Internet connectivity, and has 
an  increasing  number  of  novice  end  users  connected  to  the 
World Wide Web. Namibia is rated as having an Internet user 
growth rate of 6.9% from 2000 as reported in the 2010- 2011 
period  [1].    With  the  launching  of  the  West  Africa  Cable 
System (WACS), it is anticipated that Internet connection rates 
will  drop  allowing  more  Namibians  to  connect.  This  poses  a 
security concern for the nation as cyber criminals will also find 
it easier to connect and also they will be presented with easier 
targets.  To  protect  the  end  user’s  information,  End  user 
application  programs  have  built  in  security  features  which 
interact  with  users  to  protect  their  information.  Information 
security  protects  individual  and  organisation  security  from 
cyber criminals. 

This paper presents the findings of an online survey carried 
out  to  investigate  attitudes  towards,  behaviour  with  and 
experience of embedded security features among members of 
staff  in  a  tertiary  education  institution.  User  experience  was 
measured  by  enumerating  general  security  awareness,  policy 
awareness and implementation, as well as user behaviour and 
emotions associated with security interaction. The structure of 
the paper will be: User experience, Usable security, Case study, 
results and discussion, recommendations and conclusion. 

II. USER EXPERIENCE

A.  Definition 

User  experience  (UX)  is  an  individual’s  perceptions  and 
responses  as  a  result  of  use  or  anticipated  use  of  a  product, 
system  or  service  [2].  For  our  studies  we  will  adopt  the 
alternative definition by [3] which defines UX as: 
internal 

(e.g. 
predispositions,  expectations,  needs,  motivation,  mood,  etc.), 
the  characteristics  of  the  designed  system  (e.g.  complexity, 
purpose,  usability,  functionality,  etc.)  and  the  context  (or  the 
interaction  occurs  (e.g. 
environment)  within  which 

“a  consequence  of  a  user’s 

state 

the 

organisational/social  setting,  meaningfulness  of  the  activity, 
voluntariness of use, etc.)”.  

It is a discipline that falls in the field of Human-computer 
Interaction  (HCI).  User  experience  design  (UXD)  focuses  on 
the emotional aspects of human experience such as happiness, 
although it is closely related to User-Centered Design (UCD) 
methods,  which  target  human  performance  enhancement  [4]. 
Since user experience refers to the overall perceptions of end 
users (effectiveness, efficiency, emotional satisfaction, quality 
of  relationship  with  service  entity)  as  they  interact  with  a 
product or service [5], it is important that the design focuses on 
embracing all these factors in the security features. 

B.  End user experience 

End  users’  perception  of  application  program  quality  is 
based  on  their  experience  of  interaction,  as  well  as  on  those 
application program qualities that give rise to effective use and 
pleasure [6].  In order to have the complete picture of end user 
experience, it is necessary to consider the user’s characteristics 
(such  as  skills,  background,  personality,  motives  and  cultural 
values), product qualities (usability, appeal, behaviour) and the 
environment in which the interaction takes place [7], [3]. 

C.  Usage Factors 

Herzog  and  Shahmehri  [8]  realised  that  program  security 
has features that influence the behaviour of users towards the 
execution or implementation of such features.  It is important 
that designers focus on how to affect the user in a positive way. 
Studies  conducted  by  [9],  [10]  show  that  it  is  possible  to 
realign  security  and  usability  with  careful  attention  to  UCD 
principles,  and  make  security  usable.  The  question  is:  what 
characteristics  does  an  application  program  have  and  how  do 
they affect the user? Also: what characteristics does a user have 
that influence their experience with security features? We can 
look at how the environment, security culture and duties of the 
application  program  user  shape 
their  emotions  when 
confronted with a dialogue that requires them to act in a secure 
manner. 

Hassenzahl  [3]  came  up  with  a  model  of  UX  which 
describes  the  designer’s  as  well  as  the  user’s  perspectives  of 
product features. A designer has an intended product character 
on development, and puts up guidelines for the user to follow 
in  order  to  get  the  desired  experience.  However  because  the 
user  has  characteristics  that  shapes  how  they  perceive  the 
product, the actual product character they encounter is different 
from the intended, in turn this evokes different consequences. 
We need to evaluate the extent of positive or negative feelings 
that  can  be  experienced  by  end  users  in  a  particular 
environment, during and after interaction with the product. We 
also need to explore and how that influences further usage [6]. 
The evaluation helps us to determine how the interaction with 
security  features  can  be  guided to  ensure  a  “degree  to  which 
specified  users  can  achieve  actual  usability,  safety,  and 
satisfaction in use in a specified context of use” [11]. 

In  order  to  evaluate  the  effect  of  a  program’s  security 
feature  on  UX,  various  criteria  that  influence  the  overall  UX 
can  be  used.  Some  important  aspects  are  security  policies, 
usability  (convenience,  efficiency,  understandable,  visibility) 

[12]  user  knowledge  of  security  threats  and  solution  and/or 
mitigation  strategies  related  to  their  application  programs.  
Giovanni [13] states that end user behaviour is directly linked 
to  emotional  satisfaction.  It  is  against  these  factors  that  the 
researchers designed a survey to capture information on users’ 
awareness of ICT security policies, their knowledge of security 
threats and solutions, the feelings invoked by interaction with 
security  features  and  the  behaviour  that  results  from  the 
feeling. 

III.  USABLE SECURITY 

Usable Security (USec) also known as HCI security is the 
field  that  deals  with  human  issues  and  Information  Security, 
focusing on the design of security that is usable. It is defined as 
“A set of attributes that bear on the effort needed for use, and 
on the individual assessment of such use, by a stated or implied 
set of users” [2]. 

A.  Characteristics 

The 

include 

characteristics  of  USec 

learnability, 
understandability,  operability,  efficiency,  effectiveness  and 
user  satisfaction  [14],  [5].  Furnell  [10]  Investigated  desirable 
characteristics  of  security  such  as  locatable,  understandable, 
convenient and visible; and realised that too usable can mean 
easy  to  compromise.  A  need  to  establish  a  balance  between 
usability and complexity therefore exits. Furnell [10] also noted 
that  there  is  need  for  more  to  be  done  to  understand  users’ 
needs and address them. 

As far back as 2005, [9] identified that realigning security 
and  usability  with  careful  attention  to  user  centered  design 
principles,  security  and  usability  can  be  synergetic.  This  area 
falls under the fields of InfoSec and HCI. It is important that 
we examine human behaviour towards security in our quest to 
address problems associated with end user security.  The field 
of  HCI 
the  design,  evaluation  and 
implementation  of  interactive  computing  systems  for  human 
use.  Literature has shown that the human element is now the 
key to breaking or securing the information system. To secure 
the information, the security features presented to the end users 
must be usable in a way that appeals to them. 

is  concerned  with 

Whitman  and  Mattord  [15]  define  poor  usability  as  the 
tendency of end users to always prefer the easier option, when 
confronted with a choice between the official way of doing a 
job  and  the  easier  unofficial  way.  For  example,  whenever  a 
new program update is available, the computer will prompt the 
user  to  update  through  an  alert  but  will  include  an  option  to 
ignore  or  cancel.  Choosing  ‘yes’  implies  that  there  will  be 
more choices to make in future, while choosing to ignore the 
prompt  to  update  will  require  the  user  to  only  click  once 
without any further prompting.   

The  work  done  so  far  has  not  addressed  the  issues 
influencing 
the  security  of  end  user  experience  while 
interacting with these features. Previous work has focused on 
ensuring that security features are designed to be usable. The 
number of breaches associated with poor usage or no usage of 
security  features  is  on  the  rise.  Efforts  to  provide  technically 
robust  security  solutions  are  fruitless  if  the  beneficiary  is  not 
able  to  use  them.  We  have  investigated  the  factors  that 

influence user experience with program security features, and 
propose the model at Figure 1 that can be used to address the 
missing  link  between  usable  program  security  and  user 
experiences.  Much  has  been  done  to  realign  security  design 
with usability. However, a lot still needs to be done to enhance 
or cultivate a positive experience with usable security. 

Yeratziotis et al [16] used usability criteria to evaluate two 
online health systems. The criterion included trust, ease of use, 
terminology, ease of learning, feedback, awareness, errors, help 
and  documentation.  Yeratziotis  et  al  [16]  concluded  that 
designers  require  tools  that  assist  them  to  improve  USec,  in 
light of the fact that users need usable features to assist them in 
effectively securing their information.  

This article presents the factors that influence end users to 
behave  in  the  manner  which  they  do.  Assuming  that  the 
application  program  designers  are  focusing  on  embedding 
usable security features, what is left is  to ensure that the end 
users  secure  their  own  information  as  well  as  that  of  the 
organisation. 

B.  End user application programs 
These  are  the  application  programs  that  end  users  employ  to 
perform daily tasks on their computers. The most popular used 
application programs as documented by [12] are web browsers 
(Internet  Explorer),  email  client  (Outlook  Express)  and  word 
processors  (Microsoft Word).  In  another  Adobe  PDF  Reader, 
QuickTime,  Adobe  Flash  and  Microsoft  Office  were  also 
identified as popular application programs [17]. 

 

C.  Security and security features 

End  user  application  programs  have  embedded  security 
features  such  as 
the  update  service,  password  options, 
permissions,  encryption,  sharing  security  and  other  program-
specific features. In a survey by [12], it was found that 73% of 
respondents used passwords even though the operating system 
under  study  (Windows  XP)  has  logon  as  a  security  feature. 
Furthermore  users  are  supposed  to  use  passwords  for  online 
activities and to protect their information. 

End  users  make  use  of  application  programs  to  access 
desired services on their devices and on the Web. Application 
programs  have  thus  become  the  most  used  software  in  the 

information  technology  (IT)  age,  presenting  cybercriminals 
with  yet  another  means  of  accessing  and  manipulating  user 
information  [15],  [17].  Software  developers  have  embedded 
security  features  and  components  in  end  user  application 
programs,  in  order  to  interact  with  end  user  to  protect  their 
information [12]. However, many end users regard security as 
an  administrative  function  that  should  be  handled  by  IT 
experts.  As  such 
ignore  security-related 
responsibilities, due to the complex nature of security and the 
fact that it is not perceived to be the user’s duty [8]. 

they  usually 

 

IV.  CASE STUDY 

A  case  study  approach  was  followed  based  on  the 
approaches  defined  by  [18],  [19],  [20].  According  to  these 
authors  case  study  research  is  a  detailed  inquiry  of  an  issue 
used  to  evaluate  the  authenticity  of  the  problem  and  allows 
researchers  to  gather  realistic  data  of  the  phenomenon  being 
investigated in social and behavioural scientific research.  

A.  Academic Institution 

For  the  purpose  of  this  research,  a  case  study  of  the 
Polytechnic of Namibia (academic institution in Namibia) was 
conducted.  The Institution is located in the nation’s capital city 
Windhoek. It has a student enrolment of 13400 per annum and 
employs 670 full time staff.  Every staff member has a desktop 
or personal computer (PC) and/or laptop allocated to them for 
their  daily  work.  The  student  laboratories  and  library  are 
equipped with PCs which are used for practical sessions as well 
as  for  information  search  on  the  internet  and  on  e-library 
resources. Each PC has a Windows or Ubuntu operating system 
installed for the daily business activities. Laboratories mainly 
use Windows, although in some departments Centos, Ubuntu, 
or  MAC  OS  are  used.  Typical  application  software  includes 
Microsoft Office, Internet browsers, integrated tertiary system 
(ITS),  document 
(Acrobat),  anti-virus  software 
(Kaspersky lab), and email clients (mainly Thunderbird).  

readers 

B.  Materials and methods 

An  exploratory  case  study  design  was  used  as  it  allows 
researchers 
real 
occurrences,  such  as  group  behaviours,  within  a  population 
[18].  A  purposive,  non-probabilistic  method  of  sampling  was 

to  gather  holistic  characteristics  of 

Figure 1: UX with security interactions 

 

used,  targeting  the  sample  population  staff  members  and 
aiming  for  a  minimum  of  30  responses.  Qualitative  data 
analysis was used. It requires rigorous analysis of the data, and 
a sample of 30 is therefore sufficient [21]. 

The study area was unambiguously described in the context 
of the case, as well as in terms of the objectives and actions to 
be  taken  [22].  The  context  in  this  case  is  shaped  by  the 
organisational security culture and support mechanisms that are 
in  place.  The  researchers  therefore  looked  at  policing  of  and 
adherence to policies, as well as at security awareness.  

The  data  that  were  gathered  were  classified  according  to 
exhibited  patterns  or  characteristics,  to  allow  for  effective 
analysis.  The  classification  was  based  on  research  aims  and 
objectives.  After  classification  of  the  data,  we  established 
connections  among  different  categories.  The  categories  form 
the concepts or variables for the formulation of the theoretical 
framework, and for the relationships that form the connections. 
Meanings were logically inferred from literature. Description, 
contextualisation,  classification,  processing  and  linking  of 
gathered data were adopted. 

C.  Procedure 

issues  related 

A  survey  was  conducted  in  order  to  understand  how  the 
to  electronic 
community  handles  security 
information.    In  order  to  get  an  overall  understanding  of 
Information  Security  problems  resulting  from  inadequate  end 
user  support,  we  gathered  information  about:  end  users’ 
knowledge  of  the  security  threats  to  which  they  are  exposed 
when  they  connect  to  networks;  awareness  of  computer 
security policies in the organisation; experiences with security 
interaction;  security  technology/solutions  usage  among  the 
community  members;  the  application  programs  used  for 
primary  tasks  at  work/job;  knowledge  of  security  features 
embedded in application programs and operating systems; and 
behaviour towards security alerts.  

An  example  of  a  question  which  was  asked  is  shown  in 
Figure  2.  The  end  users  would  tick  an  appropriate  level  of 
knowledge for a policy in place.   

The  objectives  of  the  study  were  presented  to  the 
respondents in a cover letter. Based on this information, they 
made a voluntary informed choice whether or not to participate 
in  the  survey.  Thus  purposive  and  self-selecting  sampling 
techniques  were  used.  The 
treated 
anonymously and in a confidential manner, thus ensuring that 
upon  reporting  or  publishing  no  link  could  be  made  to  the 
population studied. 

responses  were 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 

Figure 2: Sample question 

 

Semi  structured  interviews  were  carried  out  with  5 
technical  and  5  non-technical  employees,  in  order  to  gain  an 
understanding  of  the  nature  of  the  representatives  of  the 
population.  Questions  were  open-  ended  so  as  to  allow 
respondents to provide us with an insight into the situation. For 
further analysis, an online survey was designed to collect data 
from a population of about 670 end users using E-surveys Pro. 
The survey tool was pre-tested with seven users, after which it 
was  deployed  to  all  population  members  by  means  of  a 
broadcast email containing the link. The online survey is quick 
and  inexpensive  to  administer.  It  furthermore  saves  time  in 
analysis  as  the  data  can  be  electronically  analysed  using 
statistical tools. 

D.  Participant selection 

The  participants  in  this  research  comprised  of  lecturers, 
administrators  and  other  professionals  who  make  up  the 
university  community.  The  institution  has  670  full  time 
employees.  The  population  was  chosen  in  order  to  reflect  a 
diversity of users from different backgrounds and professions, 
who  use  similar  application  programs  for  similar  purposes  to 
achieve different objectives.  Students were not included as the 
study  was  aimed  at  reflecting  on  a  typical  composition  of 
employees in organisation. 

Out  of  the  53  respondents  who  completed  the  survey,  23 
were female and 30 were male hence there was no gender bias. 
The  respondent  composition  was  representative  of 
the 
university  employee  population,  and  spreading  across  the 
different faculties and centres in the institution. 

E.  Data Analysis method 

Responses  from  a  sample  of  respondents  (53)  were 
analysed for patterns that demonstrate how the users think and 
feel  about  embedded  security  features  in  the  application 
programs that they use.  After this analysis, we recommended 
mechanisms  to  ensure  positive  experiences  for  users  while 
using the security features. 

To  evaluate  UX  we  followed  a  hierarchical  approach 

described by [13] which presents three stages, namely: 

Using general knowledge to provide a basic sense of 

end user program security awareness and usage; 

• 

• 

Understanding user behaviour to determine what users 

are doing and where a problem exists; and 

• 

Influencing users by determining if a security feature 
is compelling through measuring the emotion associated with 
the feature. 

To  gauge  the  security  culture  of  the  organisation,  general 
security  information  was  gathered.  The  information  captured 
the understanding of security, threats and solutions as well as 
whether the end users were implementing them or not. We then 
assessed  the  behaviour  of  end  users  with  security  feature/ 
technology and the reasons for the specific behaviour. In order 
to  fully  comprehend  the  situation,  the  emotions  of  users 
associated with their interactions were also analysed. 

V.  RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 

A.  Overview 

 
The results are based on an inductive analysis of: security 
threats  and  solution  awareness;  user  behaviour  while 
interacting  with  security  features;  user  attitudes  and  feelings 
towards security and the security policies that are in place. The 
interpretations are supported by extracts of actual responses. 

A  critical  review  of  the  literature  has  established  that 
Information  Security  problems  are  largely  due  to  a  user’s 
behaviour 
towards  security  features  and  perceptions  of 
program security.  

 The  survey  findings  indicate  that  many  factors  such  as  a 
lack  of  knowledge,  awareness,  prioritisation  of  work  targets 
and misconception of security threats affect the experience of 
the end user with security. This experience in turn influences 
the tendency not to secure information. The following sections 
present results according to the sections of the questionnaire.  

Systems Implemented 

1. 
Table 1 shows that in our study population, the computer is 
mainly  used  as  a  tool  for  communication,  for  this  task 
Thunderbird and Pronto Webmail are implemented. A variety 
of  tools  are  used  for  research  varying  for  the  different 
disciplines  and  individual  preferences.  For  Internet  browsing 
several  browsers  are  implemented  including  the  default 
Windows  browser  Internet  Explorer,  Mozilla  Firefox,  Opera 
and Google Chrome. ELearning is implemented using Moodle 
and 
electronic.  Organisational 
Administration  at  all  levels  is  implemented  on  the  Integrated 
Tertiary  system  (ITS).  The  application  programs  used  are 
mainly Microsoft products and open source software.  

services 

library 

are 

TABLE 1:PRIMARY USE OF THE COMPUTER 

% Always 

% Sometime 

% Not At 

All 

Communication 

Research 

Teaching 

Administration 

Internet 
Browsing 

Internet 
Banking 

Downloads 

Music, Skype, 

Games 

Other 

 

87 

85 

57 

51 

83 

53 

40 

17 

17 

13 

15 

38 

47 

17 

30 

34 

51 

47 

0 

0 

4 

2 

0 

17 

26 

32 

36 

TABLE 2: PERCENTAGE PROGRAM USAGE 

  

%    
Always 

%Sometimes 

%   Not 
at all 

4 

2 

2 

24 

66 

22 

40 

0 

2 

2 

22 

Word processor 

SpreadSheets 

Presentation 

Graphics 

Project 

management 

Document 
readers 

Database 
management 

Email 

Web browsers 

ITS 

86 

62 

62 

20 

4 

50 

18 

100 

92 

68 

10 

36 

36 

56 

30 

28 

42 

0 

6 

30 

26 

Other 
 
Frequently used Application Programs 

52 

2. 
The  most  popular  application  programs  are  email  clients 
which  are  used  by  100%  of  respondents,  followed  by  Web 
browsers at 92%, and word processors at 86%. ITS is used by 
68%  of 
followed  by  spread  sheets  and 
presentation software both at 62%. The document readers are 
used by 50% of the respondents, whilst the remaining programs 
are  seldom  used,  as  is  shown  in  Table  2.  The  findings 
favourably compare with those articulated by [12], [17]. 

respondents, 

A diversity of email clients are in use, which is contrary to 
the  expectation.  The  organisation  under 
study  uses 
CommuniGate pro (Pronto webmail) and Thunderbird as email 
clients. Findings indicate the use of several other email clients 
including  Windows  Live  mail.  Nine  per  cent  of  respondents 
selected other email clients and specified Pronto, which implies 
that  there  are  17  respondents  (35%)  using  CommuniGate. 
Sixty-five  per  cent  of  respondents  do not  know  that  they  use 
Pronto on a daily basis. 

B.  Factors 

This section presents the findings about the factors which 

were studied. 

1.  Knowledge of security threats 
The users are generally aware of the Information Security 
threats  to  which  they  are  exposed.,  The  survey  showed 
awareness as high as 94% for hacking and as low as 30% for 
social  engineering,  other  threats  such  as  phishing,  spam, 
spyware, viruses and worms were in the range of 74% to 92%.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

However, only 13% of the respondents knew that they had 
been hacked, 24% were not sure and the remaining 63% knew 
they had not been hacked. Hacking is the act of gaining access 
to  electronic  information  illegally  [15].  It  is  quite  likely  that 
they  do  not  understand  how  hacking  is  carried  out,  and  that 
they can therefore not detect it.  Of the 92% who are aware of 
what spam is, 64% knew that they have been victims thereof. 
The same trend is observed for all the other threats. 

Further enquiry showed that 68% of the users were aware 
that  their  email  programs  handle  spam.  With  this  level  of 
awareness,  it  is  tempting  to  assume  that  they  know  how  to 
handle  their  emails.  However,  44%  would  open  emails  from 
unfamiliar  sources  and  29%  opens  all  attachments  that  they 
receive.  

Despite  the  fact  that  passwords  are  one  of  the  most  used 
security  methods,  and  that  users  (over  70%)  know  how  to 
implement them, 40% of users will disclose their passwords to 
the  “support”  personnel  when  confronted  with  a  problem. 
Support is in these cases offered telephonically or via remote 
desktop  managers.  Users  do  not  have  a  perception  of  the 
implications of disclosing their passwords. This indicates that 
there  is  no  user  training  on  Information  Security,  as  is 
confirmed by 92% of the participants. 

Security Policy awareness 

2. 
Policy awareness is the key to successful implementation of 
security systems, in this study at most 29% of the participants 
know of the policies that exist in the organisation. Twenty-nine 
percent know about the password policy, followed by 23% of 
respondents that are aware of the Internet policy.  The general 
computer  usage  policy  is  known  by  21%  of  the  sample 
population,  and  only  13%  have  knowledge  of  the  wireless 
policy. Ironically, every staff member has a computer for their 
work, and all academic staff also have a laptop that connects 
both  to  the  wired  and  wireless  networks  in  the  organisation. 
Out of those who know about policies, 45% learnt about them 
from the Rights office and the rest from a colleague or friend. 
These results show that users are not aware of the existence and 
proper  usage  of  policies,  and  that  the  application  thereof  is 
hence not executed. User behaviour further indicates that there 
is  no  adherence  to  policies  when  users  are  confronted  with 
computer-related problems. The official process is to seek help 
from  Computer  Services.  However,  about  42%  of  users  seek 
help from the most untrusted sources of information such as the 
Internet,  friends  or  colleagues.  The  general  computer  usage 
policy states that all sensitive information should be encrypted; 
however,  the  survey  shows  that  only  15% of  the  respondents 
use the facility.  

 User experience with security interaction 

3. 
The end users acknowledge that they receive security alerts 
and  that  they  appreciate  receiving  system  feedback.  Security 
features from the point of view of the designers are meant to be 
usable.  However,  63%  of  respondents  have  negative  feelings 
with respect to notifications, especially when they are required 
to act on them (58%). Figure 3 shows some of the feelings that 
they  experience  with  these  interactions  (such  as  disruptive, 
irritating and annoying).  

 

Figure 3: User feelings torwards acting on security messages 

 
 
Security technology/Solution Usage 

 

4. 
Anti-virus  programs  and  passwords  are  the  most  used 
protection mechanisms with a prevalence of 72%, followed by 
firewalls.  Updates  are  only 
implemented  by  34%  of 
respondents,  which  means  that  systems  are  left  vulnerable  to 
current  and  new  attacks  targeting  known  vulnerabilities.  On 
further  enquiry  on  users  perform  their  updates,  70%  of  users 
identify with auto updates. The most shocking realisation is the 
fact that end users do not back up their information, with only 
23% doing it. 

The  findings  show  that  46%  of  the  participants  configure 
security  options.  However,  68%  are  knowledgeable  of  the 
existence  of  spam  filters  in  their  email  programs,  possibly 
centrally  configured  for  them  by  the  system  administrators. 
Other features such as encryption mechanisms for emails and 
files (digital signature, certificates same status) are rarely used. 
The  security  features  interact  with  users  through  alerts, 
warnings  and  dialogue  boxes  in  order  to  protect  their 
information.  A  comparable  survey  carried  out  in  2006  also 
shows disturbing low usage of security technologies [12]. 

 Embedded security feature knowledge 

5. 
Only 46% of respondents have configured security options 
in  their  application  programs.  The  idea  of  encrypting  the 
information  that  is  sent  out  via  emails  is  virtually  unknown, 
with  only  4%  using  this  feature.  Embedded  security  is  not 
being used as often as is necessary, and the absence thereof is 
making users an easy target for cybercriminals. 

 Behaviour towards security interactions 

6. 
User behaviour is influenced by many factors such as lack 
targets  and 
of  knowledge,  prioritisation  of 
threats  [8].  The  survey  has 
misconception  of  security 
confirmed the same facts. The majority of users make informed 
decisions  (i.e.  they  actually  read  the  screen  before  making  a 
choice).  

their  work 

However,  18%  ignore  such  information  or  just  click  in 
order to get rid of the message.  When it comes to passwords, 
users  seem  to  be  more  careful,  although  they  are  still 
susceptible  to  social  engineering  attacks.  Users  easily  trust 

anyone  who  claims  to  be  technical  support,  with  their  login 
credentials  (40%  of  respondents).  They  are  cautious  about 
email  attachments,  although  they  do  trust  emails  from 
unknown sources. 

When confronted with a computer problem, end users trust 
the  insecure  Internet  (29%  of  respondents)  for  help,  while 
12.5% of respondents trust their colleagues to offer a solution. 
This exposes them to internal threats as well as to hackers. End 
users  generally  do  not  update  their  application  programs  as 
often as required with 27% of respondents doing it often, 53% 
when  prompted  by  the  software  or  technician,  and  18.5% 
sometimes or never. 

About  8%  of  respondents  disable  security  programs  from 
running  on  their  PC  and  17%  disable  alerts,  but  that  the 
majority  of  respondents  allow  such  application  programs  to 
run. Those who disable alerts do so because they feel negative 
about  them.  They  feel  irritated,  annoyed,  frustrated,  or 
indifferent. Respondents also feel that their work is disrupted, 
or that it is the technician’s responsibility to deal with security 
alerts.  However,  even  among  those  who  claim  that  it  is  their 
responsibility to look after security, there are some users who 
disable the alerts. This contradiction indicates that there is no 
alignment of behaviour to feelings (see Table 3).  

There  are  mixed  feelings  about  Web  sensing,  which 
manifests as a message that notifies the user that the page they 
are trying to access has been blocked by the organisation. Most 
respondents  will  navigate  away  from  the  site  and  do  nothing 
about  it.  A  few  would  contact  the  Webmaster.  The  patterns 
show that they are aware of restrictions to visit certain sites. If 
access to a genuine business related website is restricted, they 
act on it. However, the majority feels that it is appropriate for 
organisations to block some sites. 

 Another concern is the fact that many end users allow add-
ons from the Internet to run on their computers, coupled with 
the fact that most of them have administrative rights (86% of 
respondents)  on  their  machines.  This  poses  a  great  security 
risk.  Viruses  and  other  malicious  software  can  be  executed 
remotely on their machines. Respondents download and install 
software  from  the  Internet  without  making  use  of  secure 
connections.  Sixty  per  cent  of  respondents  trust  browser  auto 
completion.    This  action  might  unknowingly  lead  them  to  a 
hacker’s site. 

 Technology Acceptance 

7. 
End  users  accept  the  use  of  a  computer  as  a  tool  for 
accomplishing  their  daily  tasks.  However,  they  do  not  trust 
technicians with their information. Despite their comfort with 
technology they do not trust updates or new versions because it 
takes a lot of time to learn, because it moves them away from 
their  comfort  zone,  or  because  of  a  fear  of  the  unknown. 
However,  some  respondents  are  indifferent  and  will  do  as 
asked when prompted to update. 

 
 
 

TABLE 3: FEELING ABOUT NOTIFICATIONS AND ERROR HANDLING 

 

  

C.  Discussion 

The results show that users are not trained with respect to 
security  threats,  solutions  and  secure  behaviour  while  using 
information and communication technologies (ICT) to do their 
work.  The  organisation  has  policies  in  place  to  govern  user 
behaviour with respect to ICT. However, end users have a low 
awareness of the existence of security policies and violate them 
by means of their behaviour. A large number of the participants 
download  and  install  software  programs  from  the  Internet  as 
they wish. 

to  be  used 

The  results  outlined  above  have  several  implications  for 
Information Security. Considering the fact that all users have at 
least one computer connected to the Internet for their job, it is 
very important that all facets of Information Security [23] are 
addressed. However, due to lack of end user training, policies 
are violated exposing the participants to hacking attacks. End 
users  (71%  of  respondents)  download  and  install  from  the 
unsafe  Internet.  This  can  lead  them  to  download  malicious 
programs such as viruses, worms, Trojan horses, logic bombs 
and  many  others  that  will  alter  and  destroy  their  information 
asset if executed. Since most users (87% of respondents) have 
administrative  rights,  it  is  quite  easy  for  the  compromised 
computers 
the  destruction  of 
information in the organisation. The application programs that 
are most popularly used in the case site are rated as the most 
vulnerable by security experts [17]. This means that, with the 
human as the known weak link, attacks can be launched against 
the  site  via  these  application  programs.  There  is  evidence  of 
poor 
information  backup  practices,  with  only  22%  of 
respondents that are always performing this task. In the event 
of  a  cyber-attack,  this  would  be  very  detrimental.  Every 
computer has a super administrator password that is maintained 
by  the  technical  team.  However,  when  confronted  with  a 
problem,  the  participants  give  away  their  passwords  to 
supposed helpdesk personnel. This is even done telephonically. 
This practice exposes users to social engineering attacks. In an 
academic  institution a lot of sensitive information is at stake, 
including student records. 

to  propagate 

  Poor  security-related  decisions  and  behaviour  with  an 
overall  negative  experience  with  Information  Security  are 
common, 
to 
exploitation by cyber criminals. 

leaving  application  programs  vulnerable 

 
 

VI.  RECOMMENDATIONS 

 

 

As  interventions  we  recommend  user  training  on  computer 
security, ensuring that security policies are in place as well as 
the promotion of security-conscious behaviour. 

Improving information security means improving the users’ 
attitudes towards security features in the application programs 
that  they  use  for  their  work.  In  order  to  improve  the  user 
experience  with  security  features,  users  must  be  aware  of 
security threats and solutions; they must know the benefits of 
using the features and must interact with the security features 
as required of them.  

We  recommend  the  UX  model  at  Figure  1  with  security 
awareness as the basis of feelings. Feelings shape attitudes and 
perceptions,  which  in  turn  influence  behaviour.  Negative 
behaviour  with  respect  to  security  features  will  result  in  a 
negative  experience  with  technology,  and  hence  result  in 
insecurity.  This  means  that  the  user  does  not  find  the 
application  programs  usable 
in 
information loss and/or compromise. Users will only be able to 
interact with embedded features if they feel good about it (the 
security will be usable). 

resulting 

job, 

for 

the 

VII.  CONCLUSION 

The research has highlighted problems that face end users 
while using computers to process, store and transmit personal 
or organisational information. The findings reflect a scenario in 
which there is a support mechanism from the organisation. It 
can  be  inferred  that  in  scenarios  where  individuals  are  not 
supported,  they  experience  more  negative  encounters  with 
security.  Based  on  the  findings  it  is  necessary  to  develop  a 
framework  for  secure  user  experiences.  The  framework  will 
ensure  that  users  correctly  interact  while  having  a  positive 
experience with built-in security features. 

REFERENCES 

[1]  Statistics, Internet World,  Internet statistics usage : the Big picture. 

Inrernet WorldStats. Available 
http://www.internetworldstats.com/stats.htm , 2011.  

[2]  A. Herzog, & Shahmehri, N. User Help Techniques for usable security. 

ACM(1-59593-635-6/07/0003), 2007. 

[3]  A.  Hanudin,,  and  T.  Ramayah,  (EJISDC  (2010)  41,  2,  1-15).  SMS 
banking: explaining the effects of attitude, social norms and perceived 
security and privacy. The Electronic Journal on Information Systems in 
Developing  Countries 
from 
http://www.ejisdc.org/ojs2/index.php/ejisdc/article/viewFile/638/315 

1-15.  Retrieved 

41(2), 

pp 

 

[4]  M.  Cummings,  Designing  for  interaction  :User  experience.  UX  design 
What  matters  to  interaction  design  Professionals.  CA,  Silicon  valley, 
USA: Uxmatters, 2008. 
ISO  9241-210.  Ergonomics  of  Human  System  Interaction-  Part  210, 
Human-Centred design for Interactive Systems, 2010. 

[5] 

[6]  K. Schulze, and H. Krömker, A Framework to Measure User Experience 
of Interactive Online Products. 7th International Conference on Methods 
and Techniques in Behavioral Research. Eindhoven, Netherlands: ACM. 
pp. 1-5, 2010. 

[7]  P.  M.  Desmet,  and  P.  Hekkert,  Framework  of  Product  Experience. 

International Journal of Design, 1(1), pp. 57-66, 2007, March 30 . 

[8]  M. Hassenzahl and N. Tractinsky. User experience - a research agenda. 
Behaviour & Information Technology 25(2), 2006, March – April. pp. 
91-97.  

[9]  L. F. Cranor, and S. Garfinkel, Security and usability: Designing systems 

people can use. Cambrige, USA: O'Reilly Media Inc, 2005. 

[10]  S. Furnell Usability versus complexity - striking the balance in end-user 
securityNetwork Security, 2010(12), pp. 13-17. doi:10.1016/s1353-4848 
(10) 70147-1, 2010, December. 

[11]  P. Lew, L. Olsina,  and L. Zhang, Integrating Quality, Quality in Use, 
Actual Usability and User Experience. 6th Central and Eastern European 
Software  engineering  Conference  CEESECR.  pp.  117-123,2010. 
Moscow, Russia: IEEE. 

[12]  S.  M.  Furnell,  A.  Jusoh,  and  D.  Katsabas,  The  Challenges  of 
understanding and using security: A survey of end-users, Computers and 
Security, 25,  pp. 27-35, 2006.  

[13]  C.  Giovanni,  Top  10  Tools  to  Measure  User  Experience,  2012. 

Pragmatic Marketing, Inc. 

[14]  Nielsen Norman Group, Usability 101: Introduction to Usability, 2012, 
retrieved May 04,2012 from http://www.nngroup.com/articles/usability-
101-introduction-to-usability/  

[15]  M.  E.  Whitman  and  H.  Mattord,  Principles  of  Information  Security. 

USA: Thomson Course technology. 2011. 

[16]  A.Yeratziotis,  D.  van  Greunen,  and  D.  Pottas,  Recommendations  for 
Usable Security in Online Health Social Networks. IEEE. 978-1-4577-
0208-2/11 pp. 220-226.  2011. 

[17]  SANS. Security prediction 2012 & 2013: The emerging security threat. 

SANS. Available http://www.sans.edu/research/security-
laboratory/article/security-predict  , 2011. 

[18]  R. K. Yin Case study Research : Design and Methods (4th ed., Vol. 5). 

London, UK: SAGE Inc.University Science, 2009. 

[19]  A.  Bhattacherjee,  Social  Science  Research:Principles,  Methods,  and 

Practices, 2nd ed. Florida: Global Text Project,  2012. 

[20]  I.  Crinson  and  M.  Leontowitsch,  Public  Health  textbook:  Qualitative 
methods.  UK:  PHAST  (Public  Health  Action  Support  Team  CIC). 
Retrieved 
http://www.healthknowledge.org.uk/public-health-
textbook/research-methods/1d-qualitative-methods , 2011. 

from 

[21]  P. DePaulo, Sample size for qualitative research,. QUIRKS, 12,  2000. 
[22]  I.  Dey,  Qualitative  data  analysis:  A  user-friendly  guide  for  social 

scientists,  London: Taylor & Francis e-Library, 2005. 

[23]  M.  Ciampa,  Security+  Guide  to  Network  Security  Fundamentals,  3rd 

ed., Boston: Tomson Course Technology, 2011. 

 
 

