Guidelines for Procedures of a Harmonised Digital 

Forensic Process in Network Forensics 

George Sibiya 
Meraka Institute 

Council for Scientific and 
Industrial Research (CSIR) 

Pretoria, RSA 

gsibiya@csir.co.za 

H.S. Venter 

Department of Computer 

Science 

University of Pretoria 
Pretoria, South Africa 
hsventer@cs.up.ac.za 

 

the 

forensic 

jurisdiction  of  a 

Abstract — Cloud computing is a new computing paradigm that 
presents  fresh  research  issues  in  the  field  of  digital  forensics. 
Cloud  computing  builds  upon  virtualisation  technologies  and  is 
distributed in nature. Depending on its implementation, the cloud 
can  span  across  numerous  countries.  Its  distributed  nature and 
virtualisation  introduces  digital  forensic  research  issues  that 
include  among  others  difficulty  in  identifying  and  collecting 
forensically  sound  evidence.  Even  if  the  evidence  may  be 
identified  and  essential  tools  for  collecting  the  evidence  are 
acquired,  it  may  be  illegal  to  access  computer  data  residing 
beyond 
investigator.  The 
investigator  needs  to  acquire  a  search  warrant  that  can  be 
executed in a specific foreign country – which may not be a single 
country  due  to  the  distributed  nature  of  the  cloud.  Obtaining 
warrants for numerous countries at once may be costly and time 
consuming.  Some  countries  may  also  fail  to  comply  with  the 
demands of cloud forensics. Since the field of digital forensics is 
itself  still  in  its  infancy,  it  lacks  standardised  forensic  processes 
and  procedures.  Thus,  digital  forensic  investigators  are  able  to 
collect  evidence,  but  often  fail  in  following  a  valid  investigation 
process that is acceptable in a court of law. In addressing digital 
forensic issues such as the above, the authors are writing a series 
of  papers  that  are  aimed  at  providing  guidelines  for  digital 
forensic  procedures  in  a  cloud  environment.  Live  forensics  and 
network forensics constitute an integral part of cloud forensics. A 
paper that deals with guidelines for digital forensic procedures in 
live  forensics  was  submitted  elsewhere.  The  current  paper  is 
therefore  the  second  in  a  series  where  the  authors  propose  and 
present  guidelines  for  digital  forensic  procedures  in  network 
forensics.  The  authors  eventually  aim  to  have  guidelines  for 
digital  forensic  procedures  in  a  cloud  environment  as  the  last 
paper in the series.  

Keywords:  component;  network  forensics;  procedures  and 

processes; cloud computing 

I. INTRODUCTION  

Computer crime has been a challenge since the dawn of the 
Internet. In most cases perpetrators are successful in breaking 
security, it is impossible for a system to be 100% secure. All 
systems are prone to security breach, no matter how strong the 
security  mechanisms  that  are  in  place.  Whenever  such 
incidences occur, the services of digital forensic investigators 
are  required.  The  ability  of  digital  forensic  investigators  to 
perform  their  function  is  heavily  reliant  on  their  ability  to 

Sipho Ngobeni 

Defence Peace and Security 

and Security 

Council for Scientific and 
Industrial Research (CSIR) 

Pretoria, South Africa 
sngobeni@csir.co.za 

Thomas Fogwill 
Meraka Institute 

Council for Scientific and 
Industrial Research (CSIR) 

Pretoria, South Africa 
tfogwill@csir.co.za 

 

acquire  digital  evidence  from  computer  systems  and  network 
devices.  Unfortunately,  computer  system  technologies  are 
changing constantly, which has a direct impact on the ability of 
forensic investigators to identify and acquire digital evidence.  
This problem arises from the fact that new technologies in 
computer  systems  come  with  new  data  storage  formats  and 
storage  locations  that  differ  from  the  ordinary  formats  and 
locations  with  which  digital  forensic  investigators  have  been 
accustomed.  Criminals  are  constantly  studying  systems  and 
developing  new  techniques  to  break  into  the  latest  systems, 
software  products  and  patches.  Digital  forensic  investigators, 
on the other hand, struggle to keep up with new developments 
in technology.  

This paper is one of a series of papers that aim to provide 
guidelines for digital forensic procedures in the cloud. The first 
paper that focuses on live digital forensics has been completed 
and  submitted.  The  current  paper  focuses  on  digital  forensic 
procedures in network forensics.  

The  paper  is  organised  as  follows:  Section  II  provides  a 
brief  background  on  network  forensics,  followed  by  a 
discussion  of  the  harmonised  digital  forensic  process  and 
challenges  that  exist  in  network  forensics.  In  Section  III  the 
authors  present  the  proposed  digital  forensic  procedures  for 
network  forensics.  Section  IV  concludes  the  paper  and  also 
presents future work.  

II. BACKGROUND 

The authors’ ultimate goal is to study digital forensics in a 
cloud  computing  environment.  Cloud  computing  is  a  new 
computing paradigm that builds upon virtualisation technology 
to provide infrastructure, platform and software as services [1–
3].  Cloud  computing  presents  challenges  to  digital  forensic 
investigators due to its virtualised and distributed nature. The 
goal  therefore  is  to  provide  guidelines  for  digital  forensic 
procedures  and  to  provide  a  digital  forensic  solution  in  the 
cloud. The current paper focuses on digital forensic procedures 
for a network environment. Network forensic procedures form 
part  of  the  procedures  that  need  to  be  carried  out  in  a  cloud 
environment.  

In this section, the authors present a brief background on 
network  forensics  and  network  forensic  challenges.  The 

authors also present the harmonised digital forensic process on 
which the procedures presented in this paper are based. 

A. 

Network Forensics 

A number of different network types exist these days, but 
they all originate from two basic ones: Local Area Networks 
(LANs)  and  Wide  Area  Networks  (WANs)  [4].  These 
networks  can  also  be  deployed  as  wireless  networks  (e.g. 
WLAN), wired networks (e.g. Ethernet) and virtual networks 
(e.g.  connection  among  virtual  machines).  In  the  context  of 
cloud  forensics,  the  network  layer  is  a  fertile  ground  from 
which digital evidence can be collected as all communications 
with cloud services occur via a local network or a wide area 
network  (e.g.  Internet).  Digital  evidence  or  data  that  can  be 
obtained  from  the  network  may  include  the  source  and 
destination address of any communication, as well as the data 
(Internet Protocol (IP) packets) that is transmitted during the 
communication session itself.  

There are various key locations in the network from which 
such data can be captured and stored. These locations include 
network  routers,  firewalls  and  even  workstations  or  network 
accessing  devices.  Information  collected  from  these  locations 
can  be  used  for  subsequent  digital  forensic  purposes,  if  there 
exists a case.  

The field of network forensics, one of the forensics fields, 
is  still  in  the  limelight  as  a  new  emerging  area  of  academic 
interest. Traditional computer forensics generally involves data 
acquisition from a storage medium such as a hard drive, while 
network  forensics  encompasses  the  capture,  recording  and 
analysis of network traffic that can be used for digital forensics 
purposes  [5].  To  conduct  network  forensics,  especially  in  a 
cloud  computing  environment,  one  would  need  to  follow  a 
standardised  digital  forensic  procedure;  however,  currently 
there is no such procedure. It is for this reason that the authors 
propose  guidelines  for  a  harmonised  digital  forensic  process 
that would be applicable in the cloud computing environment.  

B. 

Network Forensic Challenges 

Network  forensics  presents  a  number  of  challenges.  One 
common  identifiable  challenge  is  that  generally  there  is  only 
one  opportunity  to  collect  network  traffic  as  it  traverses  the 
network.  Hence,  inadequate  digital  evidence  collection  may 
result  in  the  loss  of  vital  digital  evidence  that  may  not  be 
recoverable.  Also,  since  networks  communicate  data  before 
transmission takes place, it becomes a challenge to reconstruct 
the large number of packet pieces to obtain its original form. 
Furthermore,  network  traffic  comprises  of  various  protocols 
and media types, which in turn add complexity to the already 
complicated source of digital evidence [6]. 

Fortunately, quite a number of tools have been designed to 
capture  and  analyse  network  traffic.  As  most  of  them  were 
intended for network troubleshooting and identifying problems 
in a network instead of digital evidence processing, they have 
specific shortcomings from a network forensics point of view 
[7].  

Another  challenge  that  face  forensic  investigator  while 
carrying out forensic investigations in a network environment 
is a lack of standardised procedures. There are efforts by other 

researchers  [8–10]  aimed  at  standardising  network  forensic 
procedures but they leave a lot to be desired. In the next section 
we present a harmonised digital forensic process on which the 
procedures proposed in this paper are based. 

C.  Harmonised digital forensics process 

The  harmonised  digital  forensics  process  is  presented  in 
ISO/IEC  27043  draft  standard  [11].  It  comprises  of  eleven 
phases,  i.e.  planning;  preparation;  incident  detection;  first 
response;  incident  scene  documentation;  potential  evidence 
identification; evidence collection; evidence storage; analysis, 
and  presentation.  In  addition  to  the  eleven  phases  shown  in 
Figure 1, six actions run in parallel with these phases, namely 
obtaining  authorisation,  documentation,  information  flow, 
preserving the chain of evidence and interaction with physical 
evidence.  

In variance to the harmonised digital forensics procedures 
for network forensics proposed in [11], we consider and adjust 
only  the  first  ten  phases  of  the  process  in  this  paper.  The 
presentation phase (the last phase) does not differ in network 
forensics and can be carried out as described in [11]. 

In  the  next  section  the  authors  present  in  detail  the 
procedures  that  need  to  be  carried  out  when  conducting  a 
digital forensics investigation in a network.  

III. NETWORK FORENSIC PROCEDURES 
Procedures  presented  in  this  paper  are  a  sequence  of 
activities that need to be carried out in their presented order to 
accomplish each phase of the digital forensic process. A lack 
of standardised forensic procedures leads to lack of confidence 
in  an  investigation  being  carried  out  [12].  In  a  worst-case 
scenario this increases the chances of evidence being thrown 
out of court or being not admissible at a hearing. We therefore 
address this issue by proposing procedures that can be used to 
conduct a successful investigation in a network environment. 
The procedures are depicted in Figure 1 as well as presented in 
the  sections  that  follow.  Each  subsection  contains  a  brief 
description  of  a  harmonised  digital  forensics  process  phase. 
This  is  then  followed  by  a  bulleted  list  of  the  more  specific 
digital forensic procedures. 

D. 

Incident detection phase 

This phase deals with the actual occurrence of an incident 
that  requires  forensic  investigation.  It  comprises  only  one 
action, namely the reporting of an incident.  
 

Incident  reporting.  This  action  involves  notifying  the 
forensic  team  of  the  incident.  Network  engineers  are 
usually 
receive 
notifications  from  network  tools  such  as  Intrusion 
Detection  Systems  (IDS)  and  Intrusion  Prevention 
Systems (IPS). They then relay the message to a forensic 
team.  Network  engineers  may  also  be  trained  and 
authorised  to  perform  the  first  response  actions  of  an 
investigation. 

the  ones  who 

first  observe  or 

E. 

First response phase 

This  phase  deals  with  the  restoration  of  a  system  or  a 
network to an operational state while preventing future attacks 
[13]. The first group of people to respond to the scene is the 
incident handlers in a forensic team [9]. Mechanisms are also 
put  in  place  by  means  of  which  evidence  can  be  collected 
while the network is operational. 
  Enable secure logging. It is very important that all the 
actions  performed  in  an  incident  scene  should  be 
securely  logged.  The  default  logging  systems  in  a 
network  may  not  be  standardised  and  therefore  may  be 
hard  to  read.  Default  logs  are  also  vulnerable  to  being 
manipulated  during  an  attack.  These  issues  can  be 
averted  by  investigators  having  their  own  standardised 
secure logging mechanisms.  

 

  Attack 

action 

classification.  This 

deals  with 
categorising  the  type  of  attack  in  the  incident  scene. 
Categorisation  may  include  whether  it  is  an  on-going 
attack  or  whether  it  has  halted.  Attacks  can  also  be 
classified  as  passive,  active  or  intrusive  active  attacks 
[14]. A passive attack is when an attacker eavesdrops a 
communication between two network nodes. In an active 
attack the attacker impersonates one of the active nodes 
on  a  network,  while  in  an  intrusive  active  attack  the 
attacker  gains  unauthorised  access  to  resources  in  a 
network. Each of these attack categories requires specific 
actions to be taken at an incident scene. Attacks may also 
be classified as presented in [15].  

F. 

Planning phase 

team  should  comprise  of 

In  an  organisation  this  phase  may  be  initiated  by  the 
executive establishing a digital forensics team. If the forensic 
services  are  outsourced,  an  already  existing  digital  forensics 
team(s) may already be in place. The activities carried out in 
the planning phases are as follows: 
  Forensic  Team  Organisation.  As  proposed  in  [9],  the 
investigators,  IT 
forensic 
professionals  and  incident handlers. Incident  handlers  are 
the  first  to  respond  when  an  incident  has  occurred.  They 
are  the  ones  who  carry  out  the  initial  activities  of  an 
investigation  such  as  categorising  the  type  of  attack. 
Investigators  in  the  forensic  team  may  comprise  of  legal 
advisors and members of the human resources department. 
The investigators usually oversee the investigation process 
–  from  when  the  suspected  criminal  incident  occurred 
through  to  the  conclusion of  the  case.  They  use  different 
forensic tools and techniques to carry out their duties. IT 
professionals assist the investigators by using appropriate 
tools and sometimes their privileges on the systems being 
investigated to acquire evidence.  

 

Identification  of  state-of-the-art  network  types.  In 
each  network  implementation,  network  devices  vary. 
Hence,  the  locations  from  which  evidence  can  be 
collected  also  vary.  An  advantage  with  computer 
networks is that they do not evolve as often as computer 
systems. That is, computer networks usually outlive the 
devices and computer systems (e.g. Operating Systems) 

connected  to  them.  This  means  that  forensic  tools  and 
techniques used for computer networks can be used for 
longer periods than the forensic tools used for other types 
of  forensics,  such  as  RAM  forensics.  After  a  forensic 
team  has  been  established,  there  is  still  a  need  for  the 
team  to  do  research  on  existing  network  types  and 
implementations. 
Identification of potential sources of evidence in each 
network  type.  The  location  of  potential  evidence  may 
vary  with  each  network  type  and  implementation.  In  a 
private virtual network (VPN), an edge router can be the 
key point for collecting evidence as it can be configured 
to  log  all  communications  or  to  forward  packets  to  a 
server  to  be  dumped  [16].  If  a  computer  is  connected 
through a modem to a wireless internet service provider, 
locations from where potential evidence can be collected 
differ  widely.  After  categorising  network  types  and 
implementations, it is therefore important that the digital 
forensic 
locations  and 
technologies used from where potential evidence can be 
collected. 

identify  such 

team  should 

  Development  of  specifications  or  requirements  for 
evidence  collection  tools.  For  each  network  type  and 
implementation 
there  are  specific  requirements  for 
forensic tools that can be used to acquire evidence. These 
specifications  are  informed  by  the  technologies  used  in 
those  networks.  If,  for  example,  a  network  cannot  be 
reached physically (such as virtual networks), a forensic 
tool  used  needs  to  support  remote  connectivity.  These 
specifications can  be developed  after  a  careful  study  of 
existing  networks  and  locations  (virtual  routers,  virtual 
switches, etc.) from which evidence can be collected.  

G. 

Preparation phase 

In this phase the forensic team prepares for the occurrence 
of  an  incident  that  would  require  a  forensic  investigation.  It 
comprises  of  three  activities  to  be  performed,  namely  the 
development  of  forensic  policies,  the  acquisition  of  digital 
forensic  tools  and/or  the  design  and  development  of  digital 
forensic tools. 
  Forensic  policies  and  guidelines  development. 
Forensic policies deal mainly with the responsibilities of 
a  forensic  team,  such  as  what  aspect(s)  of  a  forensic 
investigation should be handled by which personnel. Not 
everyone  in  the  forensics  team  may  be  allowed  to 
monitor  communications  in  an  organisation  [9].  Data 
transmitted  over  a  network 
includes  confidential 
information such as passwords and banking information. 
Such  information  needs  to  be  handled  carefully  and 
protected  at  all  costs,  so  that  it  does  not  land  in unsafe 
hands. Based on the information gathered in the planning 
phase  (such  as  evidence  location  and  type  of  evidence 
that  may  be  contained),  the  policies  are  developed  and 
responsibilities for aspects of the evidence allocated. 

Digital  forensic  tools  acquisition.  Based  on  the 
 
requirements  specified  in  the  planning  phase,  a  set  of  tools 
that  meet  the  requirements  is  acquired.  These  tools  may 
include the ones that the forensic team may already have in  

 

Figure 1: Harmonised digital forensics process in network forensics

 

their collection. Those not in their collection yet may be 
purchased. 

  Development/Design  of  new  digital  forensic  tools. 
Digital  forensic  tools  that  meet  requirements  may  be 
neither available in the collections of the forensic teams 
nor  for  purchase.  If  that  is  the  case,  the  forensic  team 
needs to make use of its IT professionals to design and 
develop  new  tools.  Such  services  may  be  outsourced 
with requirements specified. 

[17] needs to be ensured. The three procedural actions taken in 
network forensics are as follows:  
  Filtering. Traffic generated in a network involves a very 
large amount of data. If all such data would be collected 
by forensic investigators, it would be very hard to store 
and  analyse.  Filtering  involves  the  examination  of  the 
data  to decide  which  can be  used  as  evidence [9].  This 
action may also help identify other locations of interest 
from which evidence can be acquired. 

H. 

Incident scene documentation 

This phase deals with documentation of the incident scene. 
The  documented  information  will  include  description  of  the 
topology and tools used in the network that has been attacked 
or  under  attack.  This  can  be  achieved  with  assistance  of  a 
network engineer from the organisation being investigated. If 
the attack is on-going, other information to be documented is 
the observed network behaviour that is raising suspicions.  
  Describing  the  network.  Unlike  other  incident  scenes 
that  may  be  photographed  as  part  of  documentation,  a 
network  cannot  be  photographed.  The  documentation 
may only contain transcripts such as a description of the 
network topology and the network tools and technologies 
used in the network. Even though in most cases incident 
scene  documentation  is  useful  in  the  final  phases  of  an 
investigation,  it  can  also  be  used  in  the  evidence 
identification  phases.  This 
information 
documented  include  the  network  structure  and  network 
devices used, which may contain evidence. 

is  because 

  Describing observed activity. This involves describing 
the  observed  suspicious  activity  in  the  network.  The 
descriptions include reports sent by IDS and IPS, and the 
network 
network 
administrators. 

congestions 

observed 

by 

I. 

Potential evidence identification 

Since data in transit in a network may be extremely large, 
it  is  important  that  key  points  and  segments  of  the  network 
that are of interest to the investigators be identified. This helps 
in  minimising the  amount of  data  to be handled by focusing 
only on the relevant data. Identification of potential evidence 
may be informed by the information gathered in the planning 
phase.  
  Malicious  communication  destination.  An  attack  in  a 
network involves communications that are destined to a 
local host or a number of local hosts. These destination 
hosts are a rich source of evidence.  

  Corrupted  data  or  processes.  After  identifying  the 
hosts, the corrupted data or running processes that result 
from the attack have to be identified. 

J. 

Evidence collection 

This  phase  deals  with  the  actual  collection  of  evidence 
from an incident scene and other locations that may be linked 
to an activity being investigated in a crime scene. Best practice 

  Network  traces  collection.  This  action  involves  the 
application  of  forensic  tools  and  techniques  to  carve 
network  traces  from  identified  locations.  If  the  incident 
scene  involves  an  on-going  attack,  this  action  may 
include  monitoring  network  communications  and 
dumping the IP packets using available tools. 
files  preservation.  This  action 

involves 
calculating the HASH signatures as a means to preserve 
their  integrity.  The  signatures  may  be  verified  in  each 
subsequent phase of the digital forensic investigation. 

  Dump 

K. 

Evidence transportation 

Once  the  evidence  has  been  collected,  it  has  to  be 
transported. The transportation media may be over a secured 
network  link.  If  the  evidence  were  to  be  saved  in  physical 
storage  media,  the  transportation  procedure  would  be  as 
described  by  Mukasey  et  al.  in  [18].  The  action  performed 
here  involves  deciding  whether  to  transport  the  evidence 
through a removable storage device or network and whether to 
encrypt the transportation link. 
  Removable drive/Network. The decision on the media 
to  use  in  evidence  transportation  is  informed  by  the 
stipulated policies in the preparation phase. 

  Link  encryption.  If  the  transportation  occurs  via  a 
network,  the  links  need  to  be  encrypted.  This  will 
prevent packet sniffers and eavesdroppers from accessing 
the evidence.  

L. 

Evidence storage 

Evidence  always  has  to  be  transported  form  the  incident 
scene  to  a  more  secure  environment  where  it  cannot  be 
interfered  with.  In  this  section,  the  authors  present  ways  in 
which evidence can be stored. 
  Conversion  of  packet  attributes  into  database.  This 
action  involves  extraction  of  IP  and  ICMP  attributes 
from IP packets [10] and their storing in a database. The 
attributes may be helpful in the analysis phases for easier 
identification  of  IP  addresses  that  were  involved  in  a 
communication. 

  Storage.  If  the  evidence  has  been  transported  through 
physical storage media, it has to be stored according to 
how it is presented in [10]. If evidence is stored online, 
the environment needs to be secure with highly restricted 
remote access. 

M. 

Evidence analysis 

One  of  the  most  crucial  phases  of  a  digital  forensics 
process is the analysis phase. In this phase the digital forensics 
teams  use  different  forensic  tools  and  techniques  to  make 
sense of the collected evidence. The analysis phase helps the 
investigators  to  validate  or  dispute  allegations  of  computer 
misuse. Here it is important that investigators should adhere to 
the basic principle that analysis should be performed of copies 
of the evidence. The procedures below must not necessarily be 
followed in their presented order. The different actions may be 
assigned as tasks to different forensic team members for easier 
and faster analysis. 

  Protocol  decoding.  Protocol  decoding  [19],  [20] 
deals with the analysis of elements of a protocol. This 
is a technique applied by intrusion detection systems 
where  elements  of  a  protocol  (e.g.  IP,  ICMP)  are 
decoded  and  rules  are  applied 
to  detect  any 
violations. According to Vacca in [20], this technique 
allows  investigators  to  detect  unknown  attacks  as  it 
can correlate an exploit with a pattern.  

  Extraction of packet attributes. The attributes that 
can  be  extracted  from  an  IP  packet  include  among 
others the source IP address, destination IP address, 
source  port,  destination  port,  etc.  [21].  These 
attributes may also be obtained from the database as 
they  were  entered  in  the  evidence  storage  phase. 
They can help in attack recognition and for tools that 
help in identifying the source of the attack. 

  Marking  of  suspicious  packets.  The  attributes  that 
are  identified  as  being  violated  in  the  protocol 
decoding and extraction of packet attributes are used 
to identify suspicious packets in network traffic. Such 
packets  are  marked  as  suspicious  and  are  kept 
separate.  This  helps  in  reducing  the  amount  of  data 
that needs to be analysed, as the main focus will be 
on  the  marked  packets  [10].  This  action  needs  to 
occur  in  parallel  with  the  protocol  decoding  and 
packet extraction actions. 

  Flow  reconstruction.  The  purpose  of  network  flow 
reconstruction is to obtain a logical representation of 
the  network  structure  from  which  and  on  which  an 
attack  occurred 
in 
identifying the perpetrator and also in mitigating the 
attack.  

[22].  This  activity  assists 

  Data  reduction.  Based  on  the  marked  packets,  the 
evidence  can  be  classified  in  order  of  relevancy. 
Evidence  with  most  suspicious  packets  will  be 
prioritised  in  the  analysis  phase  and  so  reduce  the 
data  to  be  analysed  [10].  It  should  be  noted  that 
analysis  of  the  prioritised  evidence  may  eventually 
lead to a need to analyse evidence that has not been 
prioritised.  

  Data reconstruction. The purpose of this action is to 
reconstruct  human-readable  information  from  the 
network traffic. Text files, images and videos can be 
reconstructed  from  IP  packets  that  were  captured 
from  the  network  as  evidence.  Algorithms  such  as  

presented by Batenburg in [23] and implemented by 
various digital forensic tools are used to reconstruct 
human-readable data from the network flow. Images, 
files and video files may be used to substantiate cases 
of for example child pornography.  

  Keyword  indexing  and  searching.  This  action 
involves  searching  for  specific  keywords  or  phrases 
of  interest  through  the  dumped  network  files.  The 
searched key words can assist in eliminating hits that 
are not relevant to an investigation [24]. If a keyword 
of  interest  is  an  IP  address,  data  that  is  associated 
with hits on that address may be isolated for further 
scrutinising.  

  Statistical analysis of packet attributes. Kaushik et 
al.  in  [10]  present  an  algorithm  for  generating 
statistical data from IP packet attributes. In [10], it is 
argued  that  such  statistical  data  can  be  used  to 
validate the attack.  

  Attack validation using statistical information. By 
using  the  statistical  information  gathered  in  the 
statistical  analysis  of  packet  attributes  action,  and 
also  from  the  data  base  can  be  used  to  validate  an 
attack [10]. Amran et al. in [14] present an approach 
that uses the Common Vulnerability Scoring System 
(CVSS)  to  validate  an  attack.  The  scoring  approach 
also ensures the credibility of the evidence. 

IV. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In  this  paper,  the  authors  presented  digital  forensic 
procedures  on  the  basis  of  which  digital  forensics  can  be 
carried  out  in  a  network  environment.  The  procedures 
presented  follow  the  digital  forensic  processes  presented  in 
line  with  the  draft  international  standards  in  [11],  [25].  This 
paper is one in a series of papers aimed at standardising digital 
forensic  procedures  in  a  cloud  environment.  The  papers  are 
based  on  RAM  forensics  and  network  forensics  as  both 
constitute an integral part of cloud forensics. The next paper 
will  planned  will  deal  with  complete  digital  forensic 
procedures 
in  cloud  computing.  Further  research  work 
includes validation of the procedures presented in this paper. 

REFERENCES 

[1] 

[2] 

[3] 

[4] 

[5] 

G. E. Mathew, “Cloud Computing,” SETLabs 
Briefing, vol. 7, no. 7, 2009. 

T. B. Winans and J. S. Brown, “Cloud Computing: A 
collection of working papers.” 2009. 

L.-H. Schubert, “The future of cloud computing: 
Opportunities for European Cloud Computing beyond 
2010,” 2010. 

B. A. Forouzan and D. College, Data Communication 
and Networking, 3/e, 3rd ed. 2004. 

C. Y. Cho, S. Y. Lee, C. P. Tan, and Y. T. Tan, 
“Network Forensics on packet fingerprint,” in 21st 

IFIP Information Security Conference (SEC 2006), 
2006. 

[16] 

[6] 

[7] 

[8] 

[9] 

E. Casey, “Network traffic as a source of evidence: 
tool strengths, weaknesses, and future needs,” Digital 
Investigation, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 28-43, Feb. 2004. 

B. Turnbull and J. Slay, “Wireless Forensic Analysis 
tools for Use in the Electronic Evidence Collection 
Process,” in Proceddings of the 40 Hawaii 
International Conference on System Science 
(HICSS’07), 2007. 

R. F. Erbacher, M. Ieee, K. Christiansen, and A. 
Sundberg, “Visual Network Forensic Techniques and 
Processes,” Current. 

K. Kent, S. Chevalier, T. Grance, and H. Dang, 
“Guide to Integrating Forensic Techniques into 
Incident Response,” Nist Special Publication, 2006. 

[10]  A. K. Kaushik and R. C. Joshi, “Network Forensic 

System for ICMP Attacks,” International Journal of 
Computer Applications, vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 14-21, May 
2010. 

[11] 

“Information Technology- Security techniques- 
Investigation principles and processes,” U.S. Patent 
ISO/IEC WD 270432012. 

[12]  R. Leigland, “A Formalization of Digital Forensics,” 
International Journal of Digital Evidence, vol. 3, no. 
2, pp. 1-32, 2004. 

[13]  K. Mandia, C. Prosise, and M. Pepe, Incident 

Response & Computer Forensics. McGraw-
Hill/Osborne, 2003, p. 507. 

[14]  A. R. Amran, R. C. Phan, and D. J. Parish, “Metrics 

for Network Forensics Conviction Evidence,” 
Analysis. Institute of Electrical and Electronics 
Engineers, 2009. 

[15]  Y.-D. Shin, “New Digital Forensics Investigation 

Procedure Model,” 2008 Fourth International 
Conference on Networked Computing and Advanced 
Information Management, pp. 528-531, Sep. 2008. 

 

[17] 

I. Dlamini, M. Olivier, and S. Sibiya, “Pattern-Based 
Approach for Logical Traffic Isolation Forensic 
Modelling,” 2009 20th International Workshop on 
Database and Expert Systems Application, pp. 145-
149, 2009. 

“Guidelines for Best Practice in the Forensic 
Examination of Digital Technology,” International 
Organization on Computer Evidence, 2012. [Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.ioce.org/fileadmin/user_upload/2002/ioce
_bp_exam_digit_tech.html. 

[18]  M. B. Mukasey, J. L. Sedgwick, and D. W. Hagy, 

“Electronic Crime Scene Investigation : A Guide for 
First Responders , Second Edition,” Washinton, DC, 
2008. 

[19] 

[20] 

J. Long, Storage Networking Protocol Fundamentals. 
Cisco Press, 2006, p. 552. 

J. R. Vacca, Computer and Information Security 
Handbook (The Morgan Kaufmann Series in 
Computer Security). Morgan Kaufmann, 2009. 

[21]  W. Fan and Wu, Advances in Web-Age Information 
Management, 6th International Conference, WAIM 
2005, Hangzhou, China, October 11-13, 2005, 
Proceedings, vol. 3739. Springer, 2005. 

[22]  O. Demir, “A scalable agent-based system for network 
flow reconstructio with applicatios to determining the 
structure and dynamics of distributed denial of service 
attacks.,” City University of New York, 2010. 

[23]  K. J. Batenburg, “A Network Flow Algorithm for 

Binary Image Reconstruction from Few Projections,” 
LNCS 4245., Berlin Heidelburg: Springer-Verlag, 
2006, pp. 86-97. 

[24] 

[25] 

Forentech, “Forensic Lifecycle: An effective and 
repeatable process for computer forensic 
investigation.” 2005. 

“Information technology - Security techniques - 
Guidelines for identification, collection and 
acquisition and preservation of digital evidence.,” U.S. 
Patent ISO/IEC DIS 270372011.  

