Guidelines for the creation of brain-compatible cyber 

security educational material in Moodle 2.0 

Rayne Reid 

Johan Van Niekerk 

Rossouw Von Solms 

Institute for ICT Advancement 
Nelson Mandela Metropolitan 

University 

Port Elizabeth, South Africa 
s208045820@live.nmmu.ac.za 

Institute for ICT Advancement 
Nelson Mandela Metropolitan 

University 

Port Elizabeth, South Africa 

Johan.VanNiekerk@nmmu.ac.za 

 

Institute for ICT Advancement 
Nelson Mandela Metropolitan 

University 

Port Elizabeth, South Africa 

Rossouw.VonSolms@nmmu.ac.za

 

Most current approaches towards information security education 
do  not  have  a  sound  theoretical  basis.  This  could  lead  to  the 
failure of these educational programs. Furthermore, the need for 
information  security  knowledge  is  no  longer  only  of  concern  to 
organizations,  but  has  also  become  a  concern  for  individuals 
using  online  services 
for  personal  entertainment,  social 
networking, banking, and other activities. Thus, there is a need 
for  “cyber  security”  education  for  both 
individuals  and 
organizations. Such cyber security educational programs should 
be  based  on  sound  pedagogical 
theories.  One  such  a 
pedagogically sound approach that could potentially play a role 
in  cyber  security  educational  programs  is  “brain  compatible 
learning”.  This  paper  will  perform  a  critical  evaluation  of  an 
existing information security education course, and evaluate the 
subject matter in terms of brain compatible learning approaches. 
The  aim  of  the  paper  is  to  propose  a  set  of  brain  compatible 
learning guidelines for the creation of cyber security educational 
material. The paper will also argue in favour of the use e-learning 
as a delivery mechanism for such content. As such, the guidelines 
will  be  proposed  in  the  context  of  a  Moodle  2.0  e-learning 
environment. 

Information  Security  Awareness;  Brain  Compatible  Learning  ; 
Cyber Security; Information Security 

I. 

INTRODUCTION 

 

 Most  current  approaches  towards  information  security 
education fail to pay sufficient attention to pedagogical theory 
[1]. The creation, distribution and manipulation of information 
is integrated throughout all aspects of modern society. Users; 
members of the general public, businesses and other facilities; 
require access to information in order to successfully conduct 
various  daily 
in  a  personal  and/or 
professional  capacity.  Information  is  a  valuable  resource  and 
any loss, unauthorized alteration, or corruption of it can have 
serious  implications  for  all  the  users  who  rely  on  the 
information. It is therefore imperative that the protection of the 
confidentiality,  integrity  and  availability  of  information  as  a 
vital  resource  is  given  appropriate  recognition  and  attention 
before a problem can occur.  

transactions,  both 

Security  is  a  multi-faceted  problem,  the  comprehensive 
to  which  will  normally  encompass  physical, 

solution 

 

procedural  and  logical  forms  of  protection  [2].  From  an 
organizational perspective, many international standards, such 
as ISO/IEC 27002 deal with the protection of this resource. For 
people in their personal capacity, there are currently no specific 
information security standards available. However, it could be 
argued that the protection of information in either a personal or 
organizational  context  would  have  to  be  based  on  the  same 
general principles. 

Standards  such  as  ISO/IEC  27002  suggest  the  use  of 
various  information  security  controls  as  countermeasures  to 
avoid,  counteract  or  minimize  security  risks  faced  by 
informational 
suggested  controls  are 
categorically  defined  as  physical,  technical  or  operational  in 
nature.  Operational 
administrative, 
managerial, and procedural and various other types that relate 
to the role(s) humans play in the information security process. 

resources.  These 

controls 

include 

Physical controls provide a physical layer of protection. For 
example, a lock on a computer or server room’s door could be 
described  as  a  physical  control.  Technical  controls  would 
consist  of 
technological  countermeasures.  For  example, 
requiring  users  to  authenticate  themselves  by  logging  into  a 
system before being allowed to access the resources could be 
described  as  a  technological  control.  Operational  controls  are 
controls which address the role(s) of humans. An example of 
such a control could thus be a policy statement requiring users 
to lock their office door when not in the office, or to logout of 
the system when they leave their computers. Both the physical 
and technical controls would therefore depend on the humans 
involved  in  the  processes  for  their  effectiveness.  People 
involved  in  the  information  security  process  thus  play  a  vital 
role in the effectiveness of the information security process and 
must  therefore  be  educated  about  their  necessary  role(s)  and 
responsibilities. 

One  of  the  most  important  pillars  on  which  any  serious 
effort  towards information  and  cyber  security  is  based,  is  the 
level  of  awareness  (knowledge)  that  those  responsible  for 
managing  the  effort  have.  Therefore  the  issue  of  proper 
awareness, training and education of the involved people is of 
paramount  importance.  Most  standards  recommend  that  it  is 
the  lack  of  knowledge;  regarding  the  roles  people  play,  the 
responsibilities  people  and  threats  that  exist  in  relation  to the 

information; which must be addressed via information security 
awareness,  education  and  training  programs.  However,  these 
programs are often constructed by security specialists who are 
not  necessarily  educationalists  and  might 
to 
adequately educate the users involved.  

thus  fail 

This paper will focus on pre-emptive education as a way to 
control  information  security  risk.  Furnell,  Gennatou  and 
Dowland [2] state that in businesses the inclusion of security-
related issues is an integral part of any organizational training 
strategy and mechanisms to promote awareness during day-to-
day  activities.  This  extends  to  the  members  of  the  general 
public.  The  education  of  “average”,  daily  users;  members  of 
the public; about information security and its related issues is 
vital  to  protect  the  information  used  in  their  daily  lives.  The 
educational  material  should  be  based  on  a  set  of  sound 
information  security  principles.    This  paper  will  critically 
evaluate  a  general  information  security  education  program 
aimed  at  end  users  at  the  Nelson  Mandela  Metropolitan 
University (NMMU). It will then recommend guidelines for a 
more  pedagogically  appropriate  presentation  method  of  the 
subject-matter  based  on  brain  compatible  learning  theory 
principle and techniques. The paper takes the form of a case-
study.  The  next  section  will  examine  current  approaches 
towards  information  security  education  in  order  to  identify 
problems in these approaches. This will be followed by a brief 
overview  of  brain  compatible  learning.  The  paper  will  then 
present  a  case  study  demonstrating  how  brain  compatible 
learning  principles  can  be  incorporated  into  an  existing 
information security educational program. 

II.  CURRENT APPROACHES TOWARDS INFORMATION 

SECURITY EDUCATION 

 

Alnatheer  and  Nelson  [3]  state  that  security  training  and 
awareness programs are fundamental components of effective 
information security. Although this statement was made in the 
context of an organizational environment, it’s extendable to the 
general public. The purpose of all these programs is to educate 
a certain target user group regarding information security. The 
scope of the subject’s content  matter and the extent to which 
the program aims to educate the user is vastly dependent on the 
“level”  of  the  educational  program.  Security  educational 
programs  usually  aim  at  one  of  three  “levels”  of  education, 
namely; security awareness, training, or education [4]. 

The complete and comprehensive education of the users in 
cyber  security  involves  a  continuum  of  three  levels  of 
education. Each level advances the knowledge gained from the 
previous level and ultimately a comprehensive knowledge base 
of  understanding  is  developed  for  and  taught  to  the  user, 
answering questions such as “what”, “how” and “why” [4, 5]. 
These levels correspond to different types of learning, mostly 
delineated by differences in the degree of comprehension and 
detail,  both  of  which  increase  as  we  move  from  awareness 
towards education.  

The  awareness  level  consists  of  a  set  of  awareness 
activities.  As explained by Katsikas[5] and the NIST Special 
Publication  800-16[4],    awareness  level  activities  are  not  a 
form of informal informative training, they are simply activities 

Institute 

the  National 

which  aim  at  attracting  the  attention  of  individuals  to  the 
subject.  The  targeted  audiences  (the  general  users  i.e.  the 
members  of  the  public)  are  mostly  passive  recipients  of 
information and the knowledge gained through them tends to 
be  short-term,  immediate  and  specific,  unless  the  activity  is 
repeatedly exercised. This level answers the “what” question. 
Examples of possible presentation formats  are posters, flyers, 
video tapes and promotional trinkets branded by motivational 
slogans. For the content of the information security awareness 
level  NIST; 
for  Standards  and 
Technology  offers  a  full  array  of  customizable  awareness 
materials  and  resources  for  utilization.  NIST  [4,  p.  15]  states 
that  “Effective  IT  security  awareness  presentations  must  be 
designed  with  the  recognition  that  people  tend  to  practice  a 
disassociation  (tuning-out)  process  called  acclimation”.  As  a 
result of this in order to prevent the target learners(members of 
the  general  public)  from  ignoring  the  awareness  campaigns 
materials,  the  presentations  must  be  on-going,  creative,  and 
motivational,  with  the  objective  of  focusing  the  learner’s 
attention  so  that  the  learning  will  be  incorporated  into 
conscious  decision-making.  The  purpose  of  this  level  is  to 
enable the user to recognise cyber security threats. The training 
level  is  more  formalised  and  aims  to  develop  the  user’s 
knowledge and skills, so as to allow them to take appropriate 
action against the identified threats. 

The  training  level  of  the  learning  continuum  aims  at 
building  knowledge,  thereby  producing  relevant  and  needed 
security  skills  [4,5].  This  level  involves  the  development  of 
high-level concepts and skills and therefore its  execution and 
completion  period  is  usually  more  extended  than  that  of  the 
awareness  level  [4,5].  The  knowledge  taught  throughout  the 
training process teaches the user how to solving problems by 
using  the  skills  which  are  developed  by  the  training  process. 
This  level  answers  the  question  of  “how”.  Unfortunately  an 
innate  flaw  of  training  as  discussed  by  Katsikas  [5]  is  that 
because  training  activities  are  directed  towards  exposing 
trainees  to  available  knowledge  and  techniques  for  problem-
solving, knowledge gained through them tends to be long term, 
but  quickly  becomes  obsolete  and  therefore  its  impact  time 
frame is only that of an intermediate timespan. Training must 
take  into  consideration  that  not  all  trainees  require  the  same 
level  of  training.  This  is  because  the  baseline  security 
requirement for different individuals varies according to each 
user’s  personal  requirements,  experience  and  purpose  for 
undergoing the training. “The level of training one receives in 
any  particular  training  area,  according  to  the  individual’s 
background and already acquired skills. This may be covered 
by assigning a degree of difficulty (or insight) to each course, 
ranging from beginning, through intermediate to advance” [5]. 
Examples  of  training  formats  are  lectures,  interactive  demos, 
case studies and self-practice. 

As  explained  by  Katsikas  and  NIST  [4,5]  the  education 
level  of  the  learning  process  aims  at  creating  expertise 
necessary  for  information  systems  security  specialists  and 
professionals.  This  level  integrates  all  of  the  security  skills, 
theory  and  knowledge  taught  by  the  previous  levels  into  a 
single  body  of  knowledge  and  it  expands  upon  it  to  form  a 
complete  and  comprehensive  understanding  of  the  entire 
subject [4,5]. A less technically intensive format than explained 

by NIST for professionals could be adapted for general public 
users. The objective of the educational level is to develop the 
users’ understanding of what has been taught on the previous 
levels, it answers the “why” question. The impact timeframe of 
this  level  is  long-term.  Examples  of  formats  which  the 
educational 
levels  presentations  can  be  are  seminars, 
discussions, research and reading.  

A.  Problems with current security education 

Many  existing  information  and  cyber  security  education 
courses  are  not  completely  successful.  This  is  a  result  of 
several  issues  surrounding  the  courses,  their  presentation 
formats,  and  their  content.  One  of  the  first  problems  is  that 
people simply are not aware about their own need to take such 
an educational course. If people are not aware of the reason for 
the  educational  course,  they  will  not  make  an  effort  to 
understand  or  learn  from  the  course.  The  second  problem 
relates  to  the  subject  matter  itself,  although  the  technical 
controls themselves exist, the operational procedures related to 
these  controls  often  do  not  exist  and  therefore  educational 
material relating to them is either non-existent or too vague to 
matter. This problem is extended by the third problem, which is 
that  even  if  there  are  operational  guidelines  available  for 
utilization  in  a  business  environment,  there  are  normally  no 
operational  guidelines  in  existence  for  the  general  public,  the 
source  of  the  businesses  work  force.  The  other  problems  are 
mainly people (user) oriented or related.  

One of the major problems is that people are not motivated 
to  learn  about  information  security.  In  an  organizational 
context,  Valentine  [6]  supports  this  by  explaining  that  many 
employees, specifically those that do not interact with sensitive 
information,  do  not  care  about  information  security  or  social 
engineering. This is true in the public domain as well. The next 
problem is that people tend to forget what they have learnt in 
the educational course and therefore it results in the attendance 
and completion of the course being useless as the person has 
not  truly  learnt  anything.  Why  people  forget  what  they  have 
learnt shall now be expanded upon. 

There are numerous reasons for people forgetting what they 
have learnt, however these reasons may be categorized to relate 
to the course material, the course presentation or the learners 
themselves. The first reason could be that because the course 
material is set by security experts who do not necessarily have 
educational  experience,  and  as  such  the  material  may  be 
presented in a manner which is difficult to learn .This point is 
supported by research from Puhakainen [1]. Puhakainen states 
that most current information security educational approaches 
lack a sound theoretical basis. Goucher [7] states that security 
awareness training for the non-IT staff is often best delivered 
by  security  specialists  who  are  not  IT  focused  themselves. 
Conversely  material 
set  by  educators  may  not  be 
comprehensive  enough  to  cover  the  subject;  and  although  it 
would follow pedagogical theory no useful knowledge would 
be  gained  by  the  learner.  Another  problem  could  be  that;  as 
highlighted by Schultz [8]; the security training and awareness 
effort  could  simply  be  subpar;  appearing  as  a  figurative 
compliance to a standard of providing education and training; 
instead of being of a suitable standard to provide practical and 
useful  education  about  needed  skills  and  knowledge  which 

could aid in an attendees. Schultz explained this in a business 
context, but the concept  can  be extended to carry over into the 
public  domain 
teach 
information and cyber security  knowledge and skills need in 
member of the public’s daily life[8]. 

these  courses  should 

to  say 

that 

The next reason is people may forget what they have learnt; 
this  relates  back  to  the  actual  development  if  the  course 
material.  Many  training  and  education  programmes  do  not 
consider  the  learners  entry  knowledge  and  skills,  this  is 
explained  by  Schultz  and  NIST.  NIST  specifically  states  that 
“material  developers  and  trainers  should  consider  the  likely 
education  and  experience  of  their  target  audience  and  adjust 
their presentation approach and content accordingly.” However 
many  materials  developers  fail  to  take  this  into  account  and 
therefore  many 
traditional  employee  security  awareness 
programs utilize a very “one-size-fits-all” approach [6,8]. This 
ubiquitous  approach  is  quickly  becoming  obsolete  [6]  and 
therefore  leaves  many  attendees  puzzled  and  many  others 
bored,  disappointed,  and  even  hostile  because  they  have 
learned nothing new [8]. 

The  next  possible  reason  is  that  course  content  is  not 
interesting and therefore the learners could simply fail to pay 
attention to the lessons and therefore fail to benefit from what 
is being taught. 

Finally,  regardless  of  the  interest  level  in  the  course 
content, people  may  simply  fail  to  remember  what  they  have 
learnt because the course material may not have been presented 
in a memorable manner and therefore the course content may 
fail to make an impression with the learner. This reason can be 
supported  by  the  fact  that  different  people  have  different 
learning  styles.  This  argument  is  supported  by  NIST  which 
states  “Individuals  learn  in  several  ways  but  each  person,  as 
part  of  their  personality,  has  a  preferred  or  primary  learning 
style. Instruction can positively or negatively affect a student’s 
performance,  depending  on  whether 
is  matched,  or 
mismatched,  with  a  student’s  preferred  learning  style”[4]. 
NIST  then  elaborates  on  the  types  of  learning  styles  people 
may  prefer  and  how  they  may  be  applied  in  a  course.  The 
learning styles mentioned are visual, auditory and kinaesthetic-
tactile in nature [4].  

it 

In  order  to  maximize  the  impact  of  such  educational 
programs it is essential to not only focus on the content of these 
programs, like many security specialists do, but to also focus 
on  the  delivery  of  the  content.  One  promising  pedagogical 
approach which could improve the retention of knowledge by 
the  “learners”  in  an  information  security  program  is  brain-
compatible  learning.  The  next  section  will  briefly  introduce 
this pedagogical approach. 

III.  WHAT IS BRAIN-COMPATIBLE LEARNING? 

A.  How the Brain Learns 

When  presented  with  the  concept  of  the  learning  process, 
one automatically associates the process with the mind and the 
brain.  Therefore  a  brief  explanation  about  the  brain  is 
necessary,  but  an  in-depth  discussion  is  beyond  the  scope  of 
this paper. 

 
 The brain is divided into two linked hemispheres.  The left 
hemisphere  of  the  brain  handles  activities  such  as  language 
processing, while the right often deals with music and spatial 
awareness. Whatever we are doing, however, both sides of the 
brain are nearly always involved in some way, and information 
flows back and forth in a continual dialogue [9]. According to 
Caine  and  Caine  [10]  the  physical  structure  of  the  brain 
changes  as  the  result  of  experience,  this  is  called  “brain 
plasticity”. This means that as the brain is stimulated the brain 
will  grow  physiologically.  According  to  Scoffham  “learning 
and cognition appear to consist in establishing patterns between 
brain  cells”  [9],  Scoffham  explains  this  concept  further. 
Modern  scientists  believe  that  the  cortex  is  organized  into 
several hundred million neural networks or modules [9]. These 
modules extend vertically through the cortex in small columns, 
which  are  then  linked  up  into  more  complex  structures.  New 
experiences  physically  change  the  brain  by  causing  neurons, 
the brain cells principally involved in cognition, to sprout new 
branches,  or  dendrites,  and  thus  increase  communication 
among neurons across microscopic gaps called synapses. The 
synaptic leap of an electrical impulse between the axon of one 
neuron  and  the  dendrite  of  another  is  the  physical  basis  of 
learning  and  memory.  Once  the  cellular  pathway  has  “fired” 
repeatedly  a  chemical  change  occurs  which  makes  it  more 
likely  to  trigger  in  future  and  become  increasingly  efficient. 
This  is  called  ‘Hebbian  learning’,  and  is  the  physical  goal  of 
brain compatible learning techniques. 

B.  Defining Brain-Compatible Learning 

Leslie  Hart  defined  the  term  “brain-compatible”  as  the 
education  designed  to  match  “settings  and  instruction  to  the 
nature  of  the  brain,  rather  than  trying  to  force  (the  brain)  to 
comply  with  arrangements  established  with  virtually  no 
concern  for  what  this  organ  is  or  how  it  works  best.”[11] 
Jensen defined brain-compatible (brain-based) education as the 
"engagement of strategies based on principles derived from an 
understanding  of  the  brain."  Therefore  we  can  safely  devise 
that  brain-compatible  learning  is  learning  based  on  brain-
compatible  education  principles,  methods  and  techniques 
which endeavor to teach subject matter in a manner and format 
which  is  naturally  complimentary  to  the  brains  physical  and 
psychological processing functions. 

In  the  context  of  a  classroom  environment  Rogers  and 
Renard [12] explain that brain-compatible, research-supported 
teaching  techniques  allow  students  to  move  around  the 
classroom,  address  multiple  modes  of  learning,  acknowledge 
outlets  for  creative  presentation  of  learning,  provide  enough 
contrast  to  preclude  boredom,  and  contribute  to  a  motivating 
context.  It  also  allows  teachers  to  employ  summarization; 
provide anticipatory and closure strategies; and ensure a tight 
alignment  among  curriculum,  instruction,  and  assessment.  
This means that brain-based education uses evidence from all 
disciplines to enhance the brains of students [13].  

Brain-compatible  learning  has  several  principles  as  a 
general  theoretical  foundation  [10].  The  principles  are  simple 
and  neurologically  sound.  Applied  to  education  the  brain 
compatible  principles  guide  educators  in  the  defining  and 

of 

selecting 
and 
methodologies  [10].  Some  of  these  principles  will  now  be 
discussed. 

educational 

appropriate 

programs 

the  need 

One  of  the  most  important  principles  of  brain-compatible 
learning  is  that  “Emotion  is  the  gatekeeper  to  learning”[14]. 
Everything  learners  “learn  is  influenced  and  organized  by 
emotions and mindsets involving  expectancy, personal biases 
and  prejudices,  self-esteem  and 
for  social 
interaction”[10]. A learner’s emotional state is resultant of their 
body’s  chemical  messaging  system.  This  state  affects  their 
attention  and  ability  to  focus  and  therefore  it  affects  their 
ability to learn. Ornstein and Sobel, Lackoff, McGuinness and 
Pribram  and  Halgren  et  al.  (cited  by  [10])  state  that  emotion 
and cognition cannot be separated. Implication of this principle 
in  relation  to  cyber  security  education  is  therefore  that  the 
course  content  should  be  implemented  and  presented  in  a 
manner  that  provides  a  supportive  environment,  which  is  no-
threatening 
learner  and  encourages  cooperative 
approaches to learning. 

the 

to 

Another brain compatible principle is that the brain stores 
most  effectively  what  is  meaningful  from  the  learner’s 
perspective  [14].  Caine  and  Caine  [10]  explain  this  as 
“patterning”. During the learning process, the brain attempts to 
distinguish  and  understand  patterns  which  appear  in  what  is 
being learnt or experienced. The brain naturally integrates and 
assimilates information, which may initially seem random and 
disconnected, provided that the initially isolated information is 
related 
to  a  particular  student. 
Implications  for  the  education  of  the  learners  are  that  the 
subjected  material  should  be  presented  in  a  format  which 
encourages problem solving and critical thinking. 

to  what  makes  sense 

Other brain-compatible education principles do exist, but a 
complete  in-depth  study  and  analysis  of  the  brain-compatible 
principles is beyond the scope of this paper, however specific 
principles will be dealt with in more depth as part of the case 
study. 

IV.  METHODOLOGY 

 

The  remainder  of  this  paper  will  take  the  form  of  a  case 
study, as described by Cresswell [15] and follows the structure 
suggested by Creswell.  This structure is as follows: 

Introduction 

  Entry vignette  
 
  Description of the case and its context 
  Development of issues 
  Detail about the selected issues 
  Assertions 
  Closing vignette 

V. 

INTRODUCING SEAT  

A cyber security training and education programme which 
is presented in a memorable format and complies with sound 

(SEAT)  programme  at 

pedagogical  theory  is  needed.  The  aim  of  this  section  is  to 
perform  a  critical  evaluation  of  the  Security  Education  and 
Training 
the  Nelson  Mandela 
Metropolitan University (NMMU).  It will then aim to propose 
a set of brain compatible learning guidelines for the creation of 
cyber  security  educational  material  which  can  be  used  to 
update and improve the current SEAT programme. 

A.  Introduction 

In  the  first  section  of  this  paper  it  was  established  that 
information  is  important,  and  members  of  the  general  public 
need  to  be  taught  how  to  protect  it.  It  was  then  further 
discussed and a need for cyber security training and education 
programme  which  is  presented  in  a  memorable  format  and 
complies  with  sound  pedagogical  theory;  namely  brain-
compatible  education  theory;  was  established.  An  existing 
information  security  programme  is  the  SEAT  training  and 
Education  programme  at  Nelson  Mandela  Metropolitan 
University (NMMU), however this programme is not presented 
in  a  brain-compatible  educational  manner.  The  programme 
must  be  evaluated  and  brain-compatible  guidelines  should  be 
proposed, so that the SEAT’s education material may be edited 
and updated to be presented in a brain-compatible manner so as 
to increase the success rate of the courses students. 

VI.  THE SEAT DESCRIPTION 

A.  The Overview 

 

SEAT  is  a  security  education  and  training  course  at  the 
Nelson  Mandela  Metropolitan  University  (NMMU).  Its 
objectives are as follows: 

1.  To  improve  the  awareness  of  the  need  to  protect 
system resources and an organizations end users.  
2.  To develop the skills and knowledge of computer 
their  computer 

they  may  perform 

users  so 
activities more securely.  

3.  To allow online access to a rich source of security 

related best practices.  

4.  To help end users understand why security is part 
of their responsibilities, and how they impact the 
security of the organizations they work for.  

The  course  material  covers  nine  modules;  each  of  which 
covers a specific topic. Each module has a corresponding quiz 
to  test  the  learners  understanding  of  the  covered  material;  to 
progress through the course each chapters quiz must have been 
successfully completed and passed to allow progression to the 
next  chapter.  Once  all  the  modules  and  quizzes  have  been 
completed,  there  is  a  final  exam,  covering  all  the  material 
covered. The module topics are as follows: 

1.  Security in General – an introductory explanation 

of security  and security related terminology 
Information  Security  –  an  explanation  of  the  
importance  of  security  information  and  provides 
methods to secure said information 

2. 

3.  Password Security - provides the learner with best 

practices for choosing secure passwords 

4.  Virus  Awareness  -  provides 

information  on 
various  types  of  viruses,  virus  detection  and 
prevention 

5.  Data Storage and Backup - provides best practices 

about how to secure data during storage 

6.  Computer Ethics – outlines appropriate behaviors 

for computer users 

7.  Office  Discipline  -  outlines  how  system  users 

should behave in the office environment 

8.  Hardware  Security  -  addresses  the  protection    of 

hardware devices 

9.  Social  Engineering  -    covers  Social  Engineering 

and the techniques to combat such attacks 

Currently each module lesson is presented in a single flash 
file  presentation.  Each  topic’s  presentation  module  covers 
several  related  sub-topics.  The  module’s  flash  slides  content 
presentation  consists  of  text  and  representative  images.  The 
text is presented mainly in bullet points and brief explanations, 
while  the  images  are  embedded  throughout  the  presentation. 
The quizzes consist of multiple choice questions. 

This course is currently running, however it has been noted 
that this courses material and presentation method is outdated 
and  SEAT needs  to be  redeveloped. It  is  therefore  a  sensible 
solution to update the presentations to be presented in a more 
brain-compatible manner, so as to improve the success rate of 
learners  who  take  the  course.  The  section  will  outline  the 
courses specific issues which will need to be improved, as part 
of the courses redevelopment. 

VII.  DEVELOPMENT OF ISSUES  

 

The SEAT course has three categories of issues which must 
be  rectified  during  the  courses  re-development.  This  section 
will briefly outline them all, but it will focus on the category 
which relates to the presentation of the course content, as the 
other two categories fall beyond the scope of this paper. 

The first category of issues relates to the actual deployment 
and maintenance of the SEAT programme. The original SEAT 
program  is  a  program  which  was  developed  in-house  at  the 
university a few years ago. Over time certain issues have been 
identified relating to the running and updating of the program. 
The  first  issue  relating  to  its  deployment  and  continued 
functioning is that the program has a problematic tendency to 
“crash”  or  cease  functioning  correctly.  The  other  issues  all 
relate  to  the  maintenance  and  continual  updating  of  the 
program and its content. The first maintenance issue is that the 
programme is generally difficult to maintain. The updating of 
the  content 
the 
modification of code is impossible. The following issues detail 
why the first issue exists. One of the major issues is that the 
original developers of the SEAT platform are no longer in the 
employ of the university and they are therefore not available to 

time-consuming  and  unstructured, 

is 

the 

perform 
required  updates  and  modifications.  The 
programme  development  and  maintenance  instructions  were 
poorly documented and no other developers have been able to 
sufficiently  understand  what  was  documented  enough  to  risk 
modifying  what  was  in  existence.  The  modification  itself  has 
been deemed impossible as the SEAT program was developed 
using  an  older  version  of  the  development  tools  used  by  the 
university  and  the  code  is  not  compatible  with  the  current 
toolsets. 

The second category of issues relates to the actual content 
which is covered in the SEAT course. The main content issue 
is that the course’s material is outdated. Although the scope is 
large  and  covers  many  aspects  of  information  security,  the 
course  fails  to  cover  many  of  the  newer  security  threats  that 
have  come  in  to  existence  in  that  last  decade  and  conversely 
still covers many security threats which have been mitigated by 
their progression into an obsolete existence. An example of the 
continued  education  about  obsolete  threats  is  the  continued 
focus  on  floppy-disk  media  and  an  example  of  the  threats 
which  are  not  covered  is  the  failure  to  highlight  the  threats 
from  social  networks,  portable  storage  media  such  as  flash 
drives,  and  the  new  portable  technologies  such  as  iPods  and 
portable media players. 

The  third  category  is  the  one  that  this  paper  is  mainly 
focusing  on;  the  presentation  of  the  course.  According  to  a 
brain-compatible  education  principle  educational  material 
should  engage  multiple  sensory  channels  in  order  to  have 
maximum  impact  for  the  rehearsal  of  new  learning  concepts. 
SEAT only has one mode of presentation, in the format of the 
modular  flash  files;  consisting  of  text  and  image  contents; 
which  only  has  a  visual  impact  and  does  not    cater  for  all 
learners ideal  learning style. The SEAT programme currently 
provides no feedback to the learner aside from mark earned at 
the end of the quiz and a display of the questions which were 
incorrectly answered. This should be rectified to comply with 
the principle which states that feedback is vital. The  material 
being  presented  seldomly  utilizes 
learner’s  positive 
emotions to aid learning and recall. The content is presented in 
a  factual  manner,  to  which  the  student  may  not  necessarily 
relate.  A  brain-compatible  principle  which  is  related  to  this 
issue states that all new material should be relatable back to old 
material which may have meaning to the learner. The material 
is only covered in two tasks. First the topic is taught using the 
single  flash  file  presentation  and  then  a  short  quiz  is 
administered.  This  is  an  issue  because  there  is  a  principle 
which suggests that material should be repetitively reviewed to 
solidify recall and recognition of the taught material.  

the 

The  issues  identified  relate  to  seven  selected  brain-
issues  will  be 

compatible  education  principles.  These 
elaborated on in the next section. 

VIII.  DETAIL ABOUT THE SELECTED ISSUES 

In 

 

this  section 

the  aforementioned  deployment  and 
maintenance, content and presentation issues will be discussed. 
The first deployment and maintenance issue of the in-house 
deployment  has  been  mitigated  by  the  transference  of  the 

SEAT  course  material  to  Moodle.  Moodle  is  an  open  and 
modular  system  of  educational  content  distribution  and  user 
management  [16].  It  is  a  cost  effective  solution  since  the 
software  Moodle  is  available  from  General  Public  License 
(GNU). All instability issues from the previous SEAT course 
with  relation  to  stable  deployment  have  been  subsequently 
resolved.  This  transference  to  the  Moodle  platform  also 
prevents the issues of the unavailable developers, the outdated 
and  unsupported  development  tools  and  the  lack  of  system 
development  documentation  since  Moodle  is  an  open-source 
fully  documented  project  and  all  development  issues  are 
tracked by Moodle Tracker. 
Valentine  states  “the 

traditional  employee  security 
awareness model provides a static solution for a fluid problem” 
[6].  He  explains  that  information  security  is  a  constantly 
evolving  field  because  of  the  continuous  creation  of  new 
threats,  techniques,  countermeasures  and  philosophies  and 
therefore  any  security  awareness  course  can  only  provide  an 
adequate  explanation  of  information  security  as  it  currently 
exists  if  the  curriculum  is  completely  up  to  date.  The  course 
material  covers  old  security  risks  and  threats;  such  as  floppy 
disks, and does not cover new security threats; such as social 
network threats, newer technology threats such as iPods, iPads, 
kindles  and  portable  media  players  etc.  As  previously  stated 
SEAT’s course material needs to be updated, however this is 
beyond the scope of this paper. 

The  other  issues  are  all  related  to  the  presentation  of  the 
course and will be solved by the redevelopment of the course 
and the application of brain-compatible education principles. 

The  first  brain-compatible  education  principle  states  that 
the  rehearsal  of  new  learning  concepts  should  involve  a 
combination  of  multiple  sensory  channels.    This  principle  is 
supported  Scoffham  [9]  who  states  “rich  experiences  can 
promote brain growth while sensory deprivation can inhibit it”. 
As a whole this principle promotes development of educational 
material  which  caters  different  learning  styles.  NIST  [4] 
encourages  instructors  to  be  aware  of  different  learning  style 
differences  and  to  utilize  a  variety  of  teaching  approaches  to 
cater for all the styles. Laurie Materna in her book; Jump start 
the  adult  learner:  how  to  engage  and  motivate  adults  using 
Brain-compatible  Strategies;  states  that  the  use  of  many 
combined  teaching  strategies  that  promote  learning  across  all 
learning  styles  is  a  good  educational  solution  [17].  Materna 
states  that  “promoting  activities  that  activate  seeing,  hearing 
and feeling facilitates much more productive, efficient and long 
lasting  learning”  [17].  The  implications  of  this  on  the  SEAT 
course  are  that  the  course  should  be  expanded  to  include 
multiple  media  options  for  the  coverage  of  the  educational 
material.  Auditory  learners  understand  educational  material 
better after listening to the material rather than after reading the 
material. To cater for the auditory learning style the following 
examples of media expansions should be the included into the 
course: 

 
 
 

auditory streams of the lessons 
narrated flash slide presentations 
forum  for  discussions  and  sharing  of  media  and 
documents) 

  wikis  (collaboratively-built  pages  useful  for  group 

work and other negotiations) will be included 

Visual  learners  learn  by  reading  and  examining  pictures, 
graphics,  graphs  and  demonstration  media.  Scoffham  states 
that  “visual  presentation  techniques  serve  to  extend  pupil’s 
skills  beyond  the  rather  narrow  confines  of  linguistic  and 
logical-mathematical 
links  and 
connections 
that  might  not  otherwise  be  apparent”[9]. 
Additions to the SEAT course which could cater for the visual 
learners to a larger extent are the following: 

thought  and 

to  explore 

 
 
 

existing flash presentations 
videos of the classes and scenario enactments 
the  presentations  themselves  should  include  many 
graphics, charts, diagrams 

Finally  the  kinesthetic-tactile  learners  prefer  to  learn  by 
performing  physical  activities,  such  as  doing  hands-on 
activities  and  performing  practice  activities.  The  course 
modifications  which  could  make  a  difference  for 
the 
kinesthetic-tactile learners are the following: 

Interactive lesson exercises 

 
  Task simulations 
  Games which emphasize the lessons concepts learnt 

All  of  these  activities  will  be  combined  and  sequentially 

grouped to guide the learners through the course. 

 

from 

either 

cognition, 

anatomically 

The  second  brain-compatible  education  principle  which 
will be applied to the SEAT course is the principle which states 
that the presentation of the material should utilize the learner’s 
positive  emotions  to  aid  learning and recall.  This  principle  is 
important  because  “the  brain  does  not  naturally  separate 
emotions 
or 
perceptually”[9,10,18].  Learning  is  dependent  on  a  feeling  of 
security and a lack of threats [13].Fostering positive feelings in 
the learning context of the course will enable students to value 
the courses activities enough to want to learn and to achieve. 
Rogers and Rebard explain that when a person’s psychological 
needs are met, they are more likely to perform well in order to 
experience positive emotions and therefore we can deduce that 
by  maintaining a constant cycle of positive emotions through 
satisfaction  with  work  completed  and  interest  and  happiness 
with work being done, we can motivate learners to consistently 
learn material well enough to later easily recognize or recall it 
[12].  “Intellectual  learning  and  emotional  involvement  are 
linked together in the fabric of the brain [19]. The implications 
of this principle on the course are the following: 

  The  material  will  be  presented  in  a  manner  which 
relates it to the learners to issues or circumstances that 
they can relate to personally. This is because “learning 
occurs  only  when  what 
is 
meaningful  enough  to  the  student  that  he  or  she 
decides  to  actively  engage  in  the  learning  experience 
“[10]. Being meaningful to the learner often means that 
the activity satisfies specific human emotions.  

is  being  presented 

  The previously mentioned interactive lesson exercises, 
task  simulations  and  games  also  serve  to  engage  the 
learner’s emotions. 
Feedback will be provided for each quiz, activity and 
interaction with the material once redeveloped.  

The  third  brain-compatible  principle  is  to  relate  all  new 
material  back  to  old  material  rebuild  new  knowledge  on  old 
knowledge.  This  principle  promotes  assimilation;  the  process 
whereby  an  individual  incorporates  new  experiences  into  an 
existing  behaviour  pattern  [4].  This  is  because  learning  only 
occurs when what is being presented is meaningful enough to 
the  student  that  he  or  she  decides  to  actively  engage  in  the 
learning  experience  [9,10,12]The  implications  of  this  on  the 
course are as follows: 

  The 

will 

include 

presentations 

enquiry 
questions.”Enquiry  questions  draw  pupils 
into  a 
problem  so  that  they  relate  new  learning  to  their 
previous knowledge and understanding.  Without this 
link, the patterns between brain cells are not properly 
established”[9]. 

  The  previously  mentioned 

task 
simulations  can  be  related  to  real-life  problems. 
Scoffham states that thinking about real-life problems 
harnesses the brain’s natural capacities [9]. 

slides,  videos, 

  Activities which can be related to the module will be 
embedded  in  the  lessons.  An  example  would  be  the 
task simulations 

The  sequential  grouping  of  all  the  activities  in  Moodle 
allows  each  activity  to  be  built  on  the  outcomes  of  previous 
ones, this promotes this principle. 

The  fourth  brain-compatible  principle  is  to  repetitively 
review  material  to  solidify  recall  and  recognition.  Jensen 
explains that repeating what we have learnt helps the learner to 
feel  emotionally  sure  that  what  has  been  learnt  is  true  [20]. 
Subsequently  it  is  good  practice  to  encourage  learners  to 
reinforce  what  they  have  learnt  by  presenting  the  material  in 
multiple formats as discussed in relation to the first principle.  

Moodle  supports  many  types  of  built-in  activities  for 
example  forums,  glossaries,  wikis,  assignments,  quizzes  and 
choices (polls). Moodle also allows activities which on aren’t 
supported by Moodle itself to be integrated into the lessons via 
plug-ins.  This  flexible  characteristic  of  Moodle  allows  the 
educators  (security  course  developers)  the  opportunity  to 
provide learners multiple options for revision material. 

The fifth brain-compatible principle is to allow learners to 
progress through the course at their own pace.  People learn at 
different  rates,  so  this  principle  is  highly  appropriate  for 
learners to be able to have control of their training and adjust it 
to their own personal needs. Allowing learners to progress at 
their  own  pace  provides  them  with  a  larger  chance  at 
successfully  completing  the  course  and  allows  learners  to 
acquire the desired training in information security in a flexible 
manner.  In  compliance  with  this  principle  the  following 
changes will be made to the SEAT course:  

  Students will chart their progress, via the use of mark 
sheets and use logs. Renard and Rogers explain the use 
of  learning  logs  use  learning  logs  allows  learners  to 
reflect upon what they are capable of after completing 
the  lesson  in  contrast  to  what  they  were  capable  of 
before  the  lesson  [12].  It  “allows  them  to  see  their 
successes”[16].  In  Moodle  the  user  log  reports  show 
detailed  logs  of  every  action  taken  by  a  person  in 
Moodle,  as  well  as  graphs  showing  overall  activity 
statistics.   

There  are  many  other  brain-  compatible  education 
principles which could be applied, but these five are the most 
appropriate for the e-learning; Moodle; environment.  

IX.  ASSERTIONS 

Firstly,  the  authors  wish  to  assert  that,  based  on  the 
performed  evaluation,  the  NMMU  SEAT  course  can  be 
improved. Both the presentation and the content aspects of the 
course require updating. This paper examined the presentation 
solutions,  the  content  issues  fall  beyond  the  scope  of  the 
current paper but will be examined in future work. 

The first categories of deployment and maintenance issues 
have already been solved successful by the transference of the 
course material to Moodle 2.0. Since Moodle was designed to 
be  used  to  support  a  number  of  other  pedagogical  and 
andragogical  approaches  and 
flexibility, 
security and free availability are advantageous for the courses 
redevelopment, Moodle has proven to be an appropriate choice 
for  the  new  SEATs  deployment.  Since  Moodle  is  an  open-
source  platform,  this  is  a  cost  effective  solution.  E-learning 
courses  aimed  at  cyber  security  education  should 
preferably  be  developed  on  widely  used  and  supported  e-
learning frameworks and not on “in-house” platforms.  

its  modularity, 

The  courses  content  needs  to  be  constantly  updated.  
Information  and  cyber  security  are  both  constantly  evolving 
fields.  As  new  threats  are  developed,  so  must  combative 
solutions come into existence. As these solutions are developed 
they should be taught to the learners, in this case, the general 
public. The content currently presented in the SEAT course 
is  out  of  date. However the redevelopment of this content is 
beyond the scope of this paper. 

Brain-compatible techniques can be used to improve the 
presentation  of  both  the  existing  and  the  future  course 
material.  It  has  been  established  that  many  existing  security 
education  programmes  fail  and  that  this  is  possibly  because 
they  do  not  have  a  sound  pedagogical  basis.  Therefore 
information  and  cyber  security  researchers  should  consider 
brain-compatible education as a possible pedagogical approach 
to act as a solution for the problem. 

Brain-compatible 

techniques  require  a  significant 
investment  in  the  development  of  content.  Since  content 
need  to  be  presented  in  multiple  formats  making  use  of,  for 
example,  multimedia,  the  development  of  content  could  also 
require skills that a typical security expert might lack.  

X.  CONCLUSION 

 

The improvements to the SEAT course have not as of yet 
been tested empirically; however such a “field test” will be part 
of the next stage of the current research. Having evaluated the 
existing SEAT course, the brain-compatible pedagogy and the 
possibilities which arise from the combining of the two facets, 
it can be stated that the cyber security educators who develop 
security  awareness,  training  and  education  courses  can  and 
should  learn  from    educationalists  about  the  appropriate 
pedagogical approaches exist and they should incorporate them 
into their courses.  

XI.  BIBLIOGRAPHY 

[1]  P.  Puhakainen,  “A  design  theory  for  information  security  awareness,” 

University of Oulu, 2006. 

 

[2]  S.  Furnell,  M.  Gennatou,  and  P.  Dowland,  “Promoting  security 
awareness  and  training  within  small  organisations,”  1st  Australian 
Information  Security  Management  Workshop  University  of  Deakin 
Australia, 2000. 

[3]  M. Alnatheer and K. Nelson, “QUT Digital Repository :,” 7th Australian 

[4] 

Information Security Management Conference, 2009, pp. 1-3. 
J.D.  Tressler,  J.B.  Ippolito,  and  P.-based  Model,  “Information 
Technology Security Training Requirements: A Role- and Performance-
Based Model,” Nist Special Publication, 1998, pp. 15-21. 

[5]  S.K.  Katsikas,  “Health  care  management  and  information  systems 
security : awareness , training or education ?,” International Journal of 
Medical Informatics, vol. 60, 2000, pp. 129 - 135. 
J.  Valentine,  “Enhancing  the  employee  security  awareness  model,” 
Computer Fraud Security, vol. 2006, 2006, pp. 17-19. 

[6] 

[7]  W.  Goucher,  “The  Face  of  Security  Getting  the  most  from  training 
the  art  of  raising  security  awareness  without  curing 

sessions: 
insomnia1,” Computer Fraud & Security, vol. 2008, 2008, p. 15. 

[8]  E. Schultz, “Security training and awareness—fitting a square peg in a 

round hole,” Computers Security, vol. 23, 2004, pp. 1-2. 

[9]  S.  Scoffham,  “Geography,  learning  and  the  brain:  An  example  of 
literature  based  research,”  Researching  Primary  Geography,  2004,  p. 
120–28. 

[10]  R.N.  Caine  and  G.  Caine,  Making  Connections:  Teaching  and  the 
for  Supervision  and  Curriculum 

Human  Brain.,  Association 
Development, 1991. 

[11]  L.A. Hart, Human brain & human learning, Books for Educators, 1998. 
[12]  S. Rogers and L. Renard, “Relationship Driven Teaching,” Educational 

Leadership, vol. 57, 1999, pp. 34-37. 

[13]  E.P. Jensen, A fresh look at brain-based education, 2008. 
[14]  J.  McGeehan,  “Brain-Compatible  Learning.,”  Green  Teacher,  vol.  64, 

2001, pp. 7-13. 

[15]  J.W.  Creswell,  Qualitative 

Publications, 2007. 

inquiry  and  research  design,  Sage 

[16]  G.  Futa  and  B.  Gocłowska,  “Analysis  of  functionality  of  distance 

learning platform moodle,” Portal, vol. 3, 2005, pp. 331-338. 

[17]  L. Materna, Jump start the adult learner: how to engage and motivate 
adults  using  Brain-compatible  Strategies,  California:  Corwin  Press, 
2007. 

[18]  A.R.  Damasio,  Descartesʼ  Error:  Emotion,  Reason,  and  the  Human 

Brain, Putnam, 1994. 

[19]  R. Carter, Mapping the Mind, University of California Press, 2000. 
[20]  E.  Jensen,  Brain  Based  Learning  and  Teaching,  Turning  Point 

Publishers, 1995.   

