Implementation Guidelines for a Harmonised Digital 

Forensic Investigation Readiness Process Model 

Aleksandar Valjarevic 

Department of Computer Science,  

University of Pretoria 
Pretoria, South Africa 

alexander@vlatacom.com 

Hein S. Venter 

Department of Computer Science,  

University of Pretoria 
Pretoria, South Africa 

Abstract—  Digital  forensic  investigation  readiness  enables  an 
organisation  to  prepare  itself  in  order  to  perform  a  digital 
forensic  investigation  in  a  more  efficient  and  effective  manner. 
Benefits of achieving a high level of digital forensic investigation 
readiness include, but are not limited to, higher admissibility of 
digital evidence in a court of law, better utilisation of resources 
(including time and financial resources) and higher awareness of 
forensic investigation readiness. 
The  problem  that  this  paper  addresses  is  that  there  is  no 
harmonised digital forensic investigation readiness process model 
with appropriate implementation guidelines and, thus, there is a 
lack  of  an  effective  and  standardised  implementation  of  digital 
forensic investigation readiness measures within organisations.  
Valjarevic and Venter have, in their previous work, proposed a 
harmonised  digital  forensic 
investigation  readiness  process 
model. This paper proposes implementation guidelines for such a 
harmonised digital forensic investigation process model in order 
to  help  practitioners  and  researchers  to  successfully  implement 
the  proposed  model.  The  authors  believe  that  these  guidelines 
will  significantly  help  to  properly  and  consistently  implement 
digital forensic readiness measures in different organisations in a 
bid to achieve higher admissibility of digital evidence in a court 
of  law,  as  well  as  more  efficient  and  effective  digital  forensic 
investigations.  
Keywords  -  information  systems  security,  digital  forensics,  process, 
mode, guidelines 

I. 

 INTRODUCTION  

for  a  standardized  digital 

Digital  forensics  gained  importance  rapidly  over  the  past 
years.  The  need 
forensic 
investigation  process,  including  digital  forensic  investigation 
readiness,  is  on  the  rise  due  to  a  raised  number  of  security 
incidents, raised  complexity  of  digital  forensic  investigations 
and everyday advancement of information and communication 
technology.  The  fact 
that  societies  depend  heavily  on 
information technology also contributes to the importance of 
digital  forensics.  Dealing  with  digital  evidence  requires  a 
standardized  and  formalized  process  in  order  for  digital 
evidence  to  be  accepted  in  a  court  of  law.  By  the  time  of 
writing  this  paper,  there  currently  exists  no  international 
standard  formalising 
the  Digital  Forensic  Investigation 
Readiness  Process  (DFIRP).  An  effort  to  standardize  the 
process  has,  however,  started  within 
the  International 
Standardization  Organisation  (ISO), by  the  authors  [1].  Note 
that  ISO/IEC 27043  is  considering  the  DFIRP  as  an  integral 
part to the Digital Forensic Investigation Process (DFIP) and, 

for 

implementation  of 

ultimately, the DFIRP process should be contained within the 
DFIP processes, i.e. within one holistic DFIP model. Note that 
the  focus  of  this  paper  is  only  on  the  implementation  of  a 
DFIRP  and  not  on  the  entire  holistic  implementation  of  the 
DFIP as described in ISO/IEC 27043.  
Further  there  is  no  standardized  and  harmonised  set  of 
implementation  guidelines 
a 
standardized and comprehensive digital forensic investigation 
readiness process. 
The authors define the problem to be addressed in this paper 
as  follows.  Due  to  the  fact  that  there  are  various  digital 
forensic investigation readiness process models in use across 
the  globe,  there  currently  exists  no  harmonised  model  nor 
there exist implementation guideline for such a process, which 
can  be  used  as  a  standardized  set  of  guidelines  for  any 
organisation. 
 
Providing  guidelines  for  such  a  process  should  expedite 
Digital  Forensic  Investigations  (DFIs).  This  would  primarily 
be  achieved  through  enabling  easier,  more  efficient  and 
effective planning and preparation for a DFI. Such guidelines 
would also be a good departure point to encourage the training 
of  inexperienced  persons  in  the  field  of  digital  forensic 
investigation readiness.  
This section introduces the reader to the subject and states the 
problem  to  be  addressed.  The  remainder  of  the  paper  is 
structured  as  follows.  Section  II  provides  background  on 
digital  forensic  investigation  readiness,  as  same  as  on  legal 
aspects  regarding  the  digital  forensic  investigation  process. 
Also,  this  section  explains  the  basics  of  the  comprehensive 
harmonised  digital  forensic  investigation  model  proposed  by 
the Valjarevic and Venter [14, 15], with the focus on digital 
forensic investigation readiness processes.  After that, Section 
IV  presents  the  implementation  guideline  for  a  harmonised 
digital  forensic  investigation  process  model.  Section  IV 
concentrates on discussing the proposed guideline and Section 
VI concludes this paper with indications of future work.  

II.  BACKGROUND 

The  subsections  to  follow  provide  background  on  the 
following  topics.  First,  background  on  digital  forensics 
investigation  readiness  is  provided  in  order  to  introduce  the 
reader  to  the  basics  of  the  subject.  After  that,  we  provide 

towards 

interacting  with 

forensic 

the  definition  of  digital 

background on the legal aspects regarding the digital forensic 
investigation  readiness  processes,  in  order  to  show  and 
emphasize the need for a harmonised and standardized process 
to be followed.  
A.  On Digital Forensics Investigation Readiness 
The  authors  first  wish  to  provide  a  definition  of  digital 
forensics  as  established  in  previous  works  of  Valjarevic  and 
Venter  [14,  15].  Digital  forensics  is  defined  as  the  use  of 
scientifically-derived  and  proven  methods 
the 
identification,  collection,  transportation,  storage,  analysis, 
presentation  and distribution  and/or  return  and/or destruction 
of  digital  evidence  derived  from  digital  sources,  while 
obtaining  proper  authorization  for  all  actions,  properly 
documenting  all  actions, 
the  physical 
investigation,  preserving  the  evidence  and  the  chain  of 
evidence,  for  the  purpose  of  facilitating  or  furthering  the 
reconstruction  of  events  found  to  be  criminal,  or  helping  to 
anticipate  unauthorized  actions  shown  to  be  disruptive  to 
planned operations [2].  
Now  we 
introduce 
investigation readiness. 
Digital  forensic  readiness  is  defined  as  the  ability  of  an 
organisation to maximize its potential to use digital evidence 
whilst  minimizing  the  costs  of  an  investigation  [3].  What 
follows  is  a  brief  overview  of  work  related  to  the  digital 
forensic readiness processes. 
Following  works,  by  different  digital  forensic  experts, 
scientists  and  practitioners  contain  represent  past  work  in 
digital forensic readiness process itself and give some limited 
guidance in terms of implementation guidelines. 
Tan [3] identified factors that affect digital forensic readiness: 
how  logging  is  done;  what  is  logged;  Intrusion  Detection 
Systems  (IDSs);  digital  forensic  acquisition;  digital  evidence 
handling. 
Yasinsac and Manzano [4] propose six categories of policies 
to  facilitate  digital  forensic  readiness:  retaining  information; 
planning the response; training; accelerating the investigation; 
preventing anonymous activities; protecting the evidence. 
Wolfe-Wilson  and  Wolfe  [5]  emphasize  the  need  for  an 
organisation to have procedures in place in order to preserve 
digital evidence in the event that a DFI is needed.  
Rowlingson [6] defines a number of goals for digital forensic 
readiness  as  follows:  To  gather  admissible  evidence  legally 
and  without  interfering  with  business    processes;  To  gather 
evidence targeting the potential crimes and disputes that may 
adversely impact an organisation; To allow an investigation to 
proceed  at  a  cost  in  proportion  to  the  incident;  To  minimize 
interruption to the business from any investigation; To ensure 
that evidence makes a positive impact on the outcome of any 
legal  action.  Rowlingson  also  defines  key  activities  in  the 
implementation of digital forensic readiness and this is, in the 
opinion of the authors, the closest to DFIRP model defined by 
Valjarevic and Venter [14,15]: Define the business scenarios 

that  require  digital  evidence;  Identify  available  sources  and 
different types of potential evidence; Determine the evidence 
collection  requirement;  Establish  a  capability  for  securely 
gathering legally admissible evidence to meet the requirement; 
Establish a policy for secure storage and handling of potential 
evidence;  Ensure  monitoring  is  targeted  to  detect  and  deter 
major  incidents;  Specify  circumstances  when  escalation  to  a 
full  investigation  should  be  launched;  Train  staff  in  incident 
awareness, so that all those involved understand their role in 
the  digital  evidence  process  and  the  legal  sensitivities  of 
evidence;  Document  an  evidence-based  case  describing  the 
incident and its impact; Ensure legal review to facilitate action 
in response to the incident. 
Since the first Digital Forensic Research Workshop (DFRWS) 
in  2001  [7],  the  need  for  a  standard  framework  for  digital 
forensics has been acknowledged by the information security 
society. A framework for digital forensics needs to be flexible 
enough so that it can support future technologies and different 
types  of  incidents.  Therefore,  it  needs  to  be  simple  and 
abstract. On the other hand, if it is too simple and abstract then 
it  is  difficult  to  create  tool  requirements  and  test  procedures 
for each phase [8].  
There  are  several  works  presenting  digital  forensic  models, 
which include readiness as a phase, but, to the best knowledge 
of the authors, there is no DFIRP model proposed, except the 
one by Valjarevic and Venter [14, 15].  
Carrier  and  Spafford  [9]  proposed  a  digital  investigation 
process  model,  which  has  17  phases, divided  in five groups, 
one  group  being  readiness  phases.  The  group  contains  two 
phases: operation readiness phase and infrastructure readiness 
phase.  
Mandia,  Prosise,  and  Pepe  [10]  also  proposed  a  digital 
investigation  process  model  that  includes  a  readiness  phase, 
known as the pre-incident preparation phase. 
Beebe  and  Clark [11]  proposed the Hierarchical,  Objectives-
Based  Framework  for  the  Digital  Investigations  Process, 
which includes a preparation phase. Beebe and Clark include a 
preparation  phase  in  their  model.  This  phase  encompasses 
activities  to  fulfil  the  aims  of  digital  forensic  readiness.  The 
next section provides details on the proposed DFIRP model. 

B.  Legal Aspects 
In  this  section  the  authors  provide  an  overview  of  the  legal 
aspects  pertaining  to  digital  forensics  and  especially  the 
admissibility  of  digital  evidence  in  a  court  of  law.  This 
overview is not comprehensive but aims to provide the reader 
with a sense of the need for a harmonised, and ultimately, a 
standardized  digital  forensic  investigation  process.  It  should 
be  noted  that  legal  requirements  may  differ  extensively  in 
different  jurisdictions  across  the  world.  For  example,  in  the 
United Stated of America cases that include the presentation 
of  digital  evidence  are  treated  under  rule  702  of  the  Federal 
Rules  of  Evidence,  which  says:  "If  scientific,  technical,  or 
other  specialized  knowledge  will  assist  the  trier  of  fact  to 
understand  the  evidence  or  to  determine  a  fact  in  issue,  a 

witness qualified as an expert by knowledge, skill, experience, 
training,  or  education,  may  testify  thereto  in  the  form  of  an 
opinion or otherwize." For application of this rule, the Daubert 
case  (Daubert  v.  Merel,  1993)  is  the  most  important.  Other 
countries  have  similar  guidelines  regarding  the  admissibility 
of  digital  evidence.  In  the  United  Kingdom,  for  example, 
examiners usually follow guidelines issued by the Association 
of  Chief  Police  Officers  (ACPO)  for  the  authentication  and 
integrity of evidence [12, 13].  

C.  Overview of the digital forensic investigation process 

classes 

In  this  sub-section  we  wish  to  introduce  the  digital  forenic 
investigation process and its classes, for better understanding 
of the process proposed in [14, 15]. 
The  readiness  class  of  processes  deals  with  pre-incident 
investigation  processes  aimed  at  reaching  digital  forensic 
investigation  readiness  within  an  organisation.  Note  that  the 
readiness  processes  are  optional  to  the  rest  of  the  digital 
forensic  investigation  processes.  The  main  reason  why  the 
readiness processes are optional is due to the fact that these are 
proactive compared to the rest of the investigation processes, 
which are reactive in nature. 
The  initialization  class  of  processes  deals  with  the  initial 
commencement  of  the  digital  forensic  investigation.  The 
processes in this class are concerned with incident detection, 
first  response  and  planning  and  preparation  of  the  actual 
digital forensic investigation.  
The  acquisitive  class  of  processes  deals  with  the  physical 
scene  investigation  of  a  case.  Processes  in  this  class  are 
concerned  with  acquisition  of  digital  evidence  and  include 
incident scene documentation, digital evidence identification, 
collection, transportation and storage of digital evidence.  
The investigative class of processes deals with uncovering the 
digital  evidence.  It  analyses  and  interprets  digital  evidence 
acquired in order to relate these with actual events and entities 
(i.e.  people  and  computers).  Processes  in  this  class  are 
concerned  with  digital  evidence  analyses  and  interpretation, 
followed by reporting, presentation and investigation closure. 
The  concurrent  class  of  processes  takes  place  concurrently 
with  all  the  other  processes  mentioned  above.  Concurrent 
processes  are  defined  as  the  principles  which  should  be 
applied  throughout  the  digital  forensic  investigation  process 
since such concurrent processes are applicable to many other 
processes within the digital forensic investigation process.  
Figure  1  shows  the  classes  of  digital  forensic  investigation 
processes and an overview of their relations.  

Figure 1: The classes of the comprehensive harmonised 

digital forensic investigation process model 

 

 

1)  Overview of the readiness processes 

Figure  2  depicts  the  readiness  processes  class  (harmonised 
digital  forensic  investigation  readiness)  as  described  above, 
refined into process groups as follows. The class of readiness 
processes  consists  of  three  distinctive  readiness  process 
groups, being the planning process group, the implementation 
process group and the assessment process group, as shown on 
Figure 2.  

 

 
Figure 2: Readiness processes groups 

 
The planning processes group includes all readiness processes 
that are concerned with planning activities, including scenario 
definition,  identification  of possible  digital  evidence  sources, 
planning pre-incident collection, storage and manipulation of 
data  representing  possible  digital  evidence,  planning  pre-
incident  analysis  of    data  representing  possible  digital 
evidence,  planning  incident  detection,  and  defining    system 
architecture, as all depicted in Figure 3 [14].  
The  implementation  process  group  includes  the  following 
system  architecture, 
readiness  processes: 
implementing 
and 
manipulation  of  data  representing  possible  digital  evidence, 
implementing  pre-incident  analyses  of  data  representing 
possible digital evidence and implementing incident detection, 
as shown in Figure 3. These processes are concerned with the 
implementation of the results of the planning processes [14].  

implementing 

pre-incident 

collection, 

storage 

Figure 3: Readiness processes 
The  assessment  process  group 
two  readiness 
processes,  being  the  implementation  assessment  process  and 
the application of assessment results process [14]. 
The readiness processes are iterative, which implies that, after 
the  last  process,  one  can  return  to  previous  readiness 
processes, as shown in Figure 3.  

includes 

 

III. 

IMPLEMENTATION GUIDELINES FOR A HARMONISED 

DIGITAL FORENSIC INVESTIGTION READINESS PROCESS MODEL 
This  section  defines  guidelines  for  the  implementation  of  a 
comprehensive,  harmonised  digital  forensic 
investigation 
readiness process, which forms part of the comprehensive and 
harmonised digital forensic investigation process model.  
The  process  has  been  proposed  by  Valjarevic  and  Venter  in 
2012 
[14,  15].  These  papers  propose  a  harmonised 
organisation  of  the  processes  while  introducing  a  novel 

to  apply 

approach  in  the  way  some  of  the  processes  have  been 
implemented.  
Guidelines  are  proposed  based  on  a  literature  study  and 
detailed analyses of processes proposed within the harmonised 
digital forensics investigation readiness process [14, 15]. The 
aim  of  the  guidelines  is  to  enable  persons  or  entities 
responsible for digital forensic investigation readiness in their 
organisation 
the  harmonised  digital  forensics 
investigation  readiness  process,  for  any  type  of  potential 
digital  forensic  investigation,  while  conforming  to  the  basic 
principles  of  digital 
forensics  and  digital  evidence 
admisibility. 
The 
the  proposed 
guidelines for each of the sub processes within the harmonised 
digital forensics investigation readiness process. In each of the 
specific subsections the authors first provide a summary of the 
harmonised  digital  forensics  investigation  readiness  process 
itself,  after  which  the  guidelines  for  its  implementation  are 
provided.  
Each of the readiness processes and relevant implementation 
guidelines are explained in the clauses that follow. 

following  subsections  will  present 

A.  Scenario definition 
In this process one should examine all scenarios where digital 
evidence  might  be  required.  The  output  of  this  process 
includes  the  defined  scenarios.  These  might  be  scenarios  of 
information  security  incidents,  such  as  unauthorized  use  of 
resources. These can also be scenarios of other events that, as 
a consequence, require a digital forensic investigation, such as 
investigating  the  use  of  a  computer  to  distribute  child 
pornography. 
The following implementation guidelines have been identified 
for  this  process.  It  is  recommended  that  a  proper  risk 
assessment is performed during this process for each identified 
scenario, respectively. A risk assessment would enable one to 
better  identify  all  possible  threats,  vulnerabilities  and  related 
scenarios  that  would  expose  particular  information  assets. 
Based on the assessed risk from certain threats, vulnerabilities 
or scenarios, one can, in later processes, better decide on the 
required measures to achieve investigation readiness within an 
organisation.  This  will  enable  an  organisation  to  take  into 
account the risk level, costs, and benefits of possible measures 
in a bid to reduce the identified risk.  

B.  Identification of possible digital evidence sources 
In  this  process  one  should  identify  all  possible  sources  of 
digital  evidence  within  an  organisation.  The  output  of  this 
process is the defined possible sources of digital evidence.  
The following implementation guidelines have been identified 
for this process. It is recommended that an organisation makes 
a  complete  list  of  their  information  resources,  including,  but 
not  limited  to:  hardware  (computers,  servers,  smart  phones, 
phones,  ip  phones,  cellular  phones,  fax  machines,  network 
equipment, storage systems, tape libraries, memory mediums 

etc.),  software  (operating  systems,  applications,  database 
management software, drivers, add-ons etc.), data (electronic 
data  in  all  its  forms  and  formats)  and  users  of  specified 
hardware, software and data. Obtaining the said lists is often 
also  an  outcome  of  a  risk  assessment  as  indicated  in  the 
previous  process.  After  this,  possible  sources  of  digital 
evidence within these identified information resources should 
be  analysed.  This  analysis  should  be  performed  based  on 
identified  possible  scenarios  when  digital  evidence  might  be 
required.  One  should  map  all  information  resources  and  all 
possible risks identified in order to define all possible digital 
evidence sources.  
Some of the identified possible sources might not be available 
as  identified  during  the  scenario  definition  process.  For 
example, if access logs are not introduced within the system, it 
means that access logs will not be available as a source of data 
in  the  case  of  a  digital  forensic  investigation.  In  that  case, 
measures  should  be  explored  to  make  the  identified  source 
available. 
All  activities  should  be  documented  as  specified  during  the 
documentation process, which is a parallel process as shown 
in Figure 1. 

C.  Planning pre-incident collection, storage and 

manipulation of data representing possible digital 
evidence 

In  this  process  one  should  define  activities  for  pre-incident 
collection,  storage  and  manipulation  of  data  representing 
possible digital evidence. The output of this process includes 
the  defined  activities  for  pre-incident  collection,  storage  and 
manipulation of data representing possible digital evidence. 
The following implementation guidelines have been identified 
for  this  process.  One  should  determine  which  of  identified 
possible  digital  evidence  artifacts  should  be  collected. 
Collection, storage and maniputaltion (processing) techniques 
as well as technology to be used for these activities should be 
defined,  including  techniques  and  technology  for  eventual 
destruction of digital evidence. Note that the collection period 
of  potential  digital  evidence  is  to  be  determined  by  a  risk 
assessment.  Also  note 
the  collection,  storage  and 
manipulation  of  data  have  to  conform  to  digital  forensic 
investigation  principles  in  order  for  digital  evidence  to  be 
admissible  in  a  court  of  law.  Lastly,  note  that  the  retention 
period of data is to be determined based on three factors: by 
conducting  a  risk  assessment;  previous  experience  regarding 
incident  detection,  data  quantities,  network  capacity  and  all 
other  matters  that  could  influence  cost  or  efficiency  of  this 
process; laws within the particular jurisdiction.  
During this process, one should also make a list of all needed 
resources in order to perform needed actions, including human 
resources and technology resources. A list of human resources 
needed  should  include  the  investigator’s  level  of  education, 
knowledge  and  skills.  A  list  of  technology  resources  needed 
should include the needed hardware and software, with special 
attention  to  specialized  hardware  and  software  devices  for 

that 

collection,  storage  and  manipulation  of  potential  digital 
evidence. 
All  activities  should  be  documented  as  specified  during  the 
documentation process, which is a parallel process as shown 
in Figure 1. 

D.  Planning pre-incident analysis of data representing 

possible digital evidence 

the  digital 

forensic 

In this process one should define procedures for pre-incident 
analysis  of  data  representing  possible  digital  evidence.  The 
input  to  this process  includes  the  scenarios  as defined  in the 
scenario definition process as well as the output from the pre-
incident  collection  process.   The  input  must  also  include the 
aims  for  the  readiness  processes.  The  output  of  this  process 
includes the defined activities for pre-incident analysis of the 
data that represent possible digital evidence. The aim of this 
analysis is to detect an incident. Therefore, activities defined 
in  this  process  must  include  exact  information  on  how  the 
incident  is  detected  and  what  behaviour  constitutes  an 
incident. As the output of this process is delivered in the form 
of  detected  incidents,  this  links  to  the  input  of  the  incident 
detection  process  of 
investigation 
processes as listed in Figure 3. 
The following implementation guidelines have been identified 
for  this  process.  As  the  task  of  data  analysis  and  incident 
detection  is  often  outside  the  scope  of  the  functionalities  of 
targeted  information  systems,  it  is  recommended  that  this 
process  defines  an  interface  between  the  readiness  processes 
and a monitoring system, which would analyse data in order to 
detect  incidents.  The  monitoring  system  can  be  any  system 
that is specialised for this purpose. For example, it can be any 
or  more  of  the  following  systems:  intrusion  detection  and 
prevention 
logging 
systems, etc. 
Furthermore, a decision should be made on a solution that will 
be  chosen  for  a  monitoring  system,  as  defined  above.  In 
addition,  an  interface  and  the  data  format  for  data  exchange 
over  such  an  interface  should  be  strictly  defined.  Special 
attention  should  be  given  to  the  automation  of  the  interface. 
As activities of this process are often outside the scope of the 
functionalities  of  the  target  information  system,  and  are 
performed within an external system, it is of high importance 
that the appropriate interfaces are defined in detail. 
For this planning process it is also imperative to make a list of 
all  needed  resources  in  order  to  perform  all  needed  actions, 
including human resources and technology resources. 
All  activities  should  be  documented  as  specified  during  the 
documentation process, which is a parallel process as shown 
in Figure 1. 

change-tracking 

systems, 

systems, 

E.  Planning incident detection 
In  this  process  one  should  define  actions  to  be  performed 
when  an  incident  is  detected.  The  output  of  this  process 
includes defined  actions  to be performed once  an  incident  is 

detected, in particular information to be passed on to the rest 
of  digital  forensic  investigation  process.  Information  should 
also include pre-known system inputs, results from all of the 
readiness  class  processes  as  well  as  data  gathered  and 
generated during the implementation process group processes. 
The following implementation guidelines have been identified 
for this process. While defining what constitutes an incident is 
a task of previous process, in this process one should define all 
information to be collected about an incident and one should 
also define specific actions to be performed when an incident 
is detected. Information to be collected might include details 
on: 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

hardware,  
software,  
data  
users affected by the incident,  
description of the threat,  
description of the vulnerability used,  
description of exposure,  
information  available  about  origin,  technique  and 
technology used to cause an incident.  

Furthermore,  actions  to  be  performed  once  an  incident  is 
detected      depend  on  the  particular  system  used  for  incident 
detection,  policies  of  the  organisation  and  the  jurisdiction. 
Actions  can  range  from  neutralising  threats  using  anti-virus 
software, shutting-down a network connection, or notifying an 
internal  or  external  department,  which  will  then  act  on  the 
incident. 
At this point one should plan for possible needed interactions 
with  the  physical  investigations  at  the  crime  scene  (event 
scene).  Also,  there  should  be  a  clear  procedure  on  which 
persons  and  which  institutions  should  be  notified  during  the 
occurrence of a specific incident. 
Once again, one should make a list of all needed resources in 
order  to  perform  the  needed  actions,  including  human 
resources and technology resources. 
All  activities  should  be  documented  as  specified  during  the 
documentation process, which is a parallel process as shown 
in Figure 1. 

this  process  one  should  define 

F.  Defining system architecture 
information  system 
In 
architecture for the organisation, while taking into account the 
output results of all previous readiness processes. Input to this 
process  is  the  results  from  all  previous  readiness  processes. 
The  input  must  also  include  the  aims  for  the  readiness 
processes.  The  output  of  this  process  is  the  defined  system 
architecture  for  the  organisation.  The  aim  is  to  customize 
system  architecture  to  accommodate  the  accomplishment  of 
the aims of the readiness processes. 
The following implementation guidelines have been identified 
for  this  process.  One  should  consider  including  all  changes 
that  might  contribute  to  achieving  a  higher  level  of  digital 

forensic  investigation  readiness.  Examples  of  this  would 
include  measures  and  solutions  for  collecting,  storing  and 
analyzing  possible  digital  evidence,  introducing  new  sources 
of  possible  digital  evidence  and  introducing  solutions  to 
improve  the  organisation’s  overall  level  of  information 
security. One should repeat risk analysis at this point, to weigh 
possible  benefits  of  changes  to  system  architecture  and 
compare  these  to  needed  economical  investment  to  achieve 
these changes. The repeat of a risk analysis is needed as there 
are going to be changes to the resources and therefore changes 
in possible vulnerabilities, threats and exposures. It should be 
noted that the level of risk analysis required here should not be 
as exhaustive as the original risk analysis, since many of the 
issues  would  have  been  dealt  with  during  the  initial  risk 
analysis. 
One  must  make  sure  that  proposed  changes  do  not  interfere 
with functionalities of the target information system and that 
they  do  not  change  or  improve  current  level  of  information 
systems security. 
Proposed changes must detail changes in: 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

logical system layout, 
physical system layout, 
system network layout, 
hardware, 
software, 
firmware, 
operating procedures, 
functionalities, 
data formats, 
data flows. 

During this process one should also make a list of all needed 
resources  in  order  to  perform  needed  actions,  including 
resources to undertake changes to current system architecture. 
All  activities  should  be  documented  as  specified  during  the 
documentation process, which is a parallel process as shown 
in Figure 1. 

G.  Implementing system architecture 
In this process one should implement the system architecture 
as  defined  in  the  defining  system  architecture  process.  The 
output of this process is the implemented system architecture. 
Examples  of  implementing  system  architecture  include  the 
installation  of  new  software,  hardware  and/or  policies  which 
will  permit  the  remainder  of  the  readiness  processes  to  be 
instantiated  across 
the 
organisation. 
The following implementation guidelines have been identified 
for 
that  all 
implementations are first tested in a test environment, prior to 
impelemnting  any  solution  into  a  production  environment 
information system. All testing results should be documented. 
All  information  system  users  should  be  timely  informed  on 
changes and any impact on the use of the system. At this point 
one should also make sure that actions to be taken are in line 

  One  should  make  sure 

this  process. 

system  and 

information 

the 

 

is 

and 

storage 

collection, 

pre-incident 

this  process 

with  existing  organisational  policies  and  jurisdiction.  Also, 
one  should  make  sure  that  all  needed  autorizations  are  in 
place.  
All  activities  should  be  documented  as  specified  during  the 
documentation process, which is a parallel process as shown 
in Figure 1. 
Implementing 
manipulation of data representing possible digital evidence 
In this process one should implement pre-incident collection, 
storage and manipulation of data representing possible digital 
evidence,  as  defined  in  the  planning  pre-incident  collection, 
storage and manipulation of data representing possible digital 
evidence  process.  The  output  of 
the 
implemented pre-incident collection, storage and manipulation 
of data representing possible digital evidence. 
Examples of pre-incident collection, storage and manipulation 
of  data  representing  possible  digital  evidence  include  the 
implementation of logging software and hardware, with time 
stamping  and  digital  signature  mechanisms  in  place,  or  the 
implementation of customized software to collect the data of 
importance (i.e. system usage data). 
The following implementation guidelines have been identified 
for 
that  all 
implementations are first tested in a test environment, prior to 
impelemnting  any  solution  into  a  production  environment 
information system. All testing results should be documented. 
As  stated  for  the  previous  process,  at  this  point  one  should 
make  sure  that  actions  to  be  taken  are  in  line  with  existing 
organisational  policies  and  jurisdiction  and  that  all  needed 
autorizations are in place.  
All  activities  should  be  documented  as  specified  during  the 
documentation process, which is a parallel process as shown 
in Figure 1. 

this  process.  One 

should  make 

sure 

H.  Implementing pre-incident analysis of data representing 

possible digital evidence 

In this process one should implement pre-incident analyses of 
data  representing  possible  digital  evidence,  as  defined  in  the 
planning  pre-incident  analyses  of  data  representing  possible 
digital  evidence  process.  The  output  of  this  process  is  the 
implemented  pre-incident  analyses  of  data  representing 
possible  digital  evidence.  Examples  of  pre-incident  analyses 
of  data  representing  possible  digital  evidence  include  the 
implementation  of  change-tracking 
intrusion 
detection/prevention software and/or anti-virus software.  
The following implementation guidelines have been identified 
for 
that  all 
implementations are first tested in a test environment, prior to 
impelemnting  any  solution  into  a  production  environment 
information system. All testing results should be documented. 
As this process entails implementation of an external system 
to  the  target  information  system,  one  must  make  sure  that 
interface  introduced  between  these  two  will  not  influence 

this  process.  One 

should  make 

software, 

sure 

functionalities  of  the  target  information  system.  Further 
interface  activities  should  be  closely  monitored  in  order  to 
detect  any  deviations 
functionality  and 
performance of the target information system.  
All  activities  should  be  documented  as  specified  during  the 
documentation process, which is a parallel process as shown 
in Figure 1. 

from  desired 

is  detected  via 

intrusion  detection 

Implementing incident detection 

I. 
In  this  process  one  should  implement  the  actions  defined  in 
the  planning  incident  detection  process.  The  implementation 
of incident detection depends also on and receives input from 
the  implementing  pre-incident  analyses  of  data  representing 
possible digital evidence process, as detection occurs based on 
the  analyses  performed.  During  the  implementing  incident 
detection process, detection of an incident occurs according to 
the  rules  defined  during planning  incident  detection process. 
Also, during the implementing incident detection process, one 
should  decide  on  which  data  about  the  incident  should  be 
passed on to the rest of digital forensic investigation process. 
Examples  of  incident  detection  can  be  if  change  tracking 
software  detects  changes  in  a  certain  archived  log  or  if  an 
intrusion 
system. 
Requirements for an event to be declared an incident requiring 
digital  forensic  investigation  would  depend  on  policies  of 
organisation  and  can  not  be  prescribed  by  this  paper.  This 
process  represents  an  interface  to  the  rest  of  the  digital 
forensic  investigation  process.  This  process  is  an  overlap 
between  readiness  processes  and  an  investigation  itself.  The 
reason for overlap is that the digital forensic investigation can 
not start until there is an incident detected. 
The following implementation guidelines have been identified 
for 
that  all 
implementations are first tested in a test environment, prior to 
impelemnting  any  solution 
into  production  environemnt 
information system. All testing results should be documented. 
As  this  process  entails  implementation  of  an  interface  to  the 
rest of digital forensic investigation processes, one must make 
that the interface is tested and functional. Note that interface 
does  not  necesserelly  have  to  be  electronic  interface.  It  can 
also  be  a  manual  interface,  i.e.  notifying  external  entity  via 
telephone or in writing. Further interface activities should be 
closely  monitored  in  order  to  detect  any  deviations  from 
desired 
and  performance.  Also,  where 
communication  with  external  entities,  being  organizations, 
persons  or  systems  is  needed  as  part  of  this  process,  one 
should timely establish communication lines and identify and 
contact responsible persons within these external entities.  
All  activities  should  be  documented  as  specified  during  the 
documentation process, which is a parallel process as shown 
in Figure 1. 

  One  should  make  sure 

this  process. 

functionality 

 

J.  Assessment of implementation  
In the assessment of implementation process, one performs an 
assessment of the results of the implementation process group 

should  be 

and compares these to the aims for achieving digital forensic 
investigation  readiness.  The  output  of  this  process  is  the 
results  of  the  assessment  of  implementing  digital  forensic 
investigation readiness for an information system.  
The following implementation guidelines have been identified 
for this process.  One should analyse how successful each of 
the processes is in fullfilling aims of digital forensic readiness. 
Also,  holistic  view 
analyse 
interdependencies  between  the  processes  and  whether  these 
are optimal and produce best resutls. It is recommended that, 
at  this  process,  a  legal  revision  is  carried  out  for  all 
procedures,  measures  and  architectures  defined  previously. 
The  revision  should  show,  amongst  other,  whether  there  is 
conformity  with  the  legal  environment  and  digital  forensics 
principals  of  the  particular  jurisdiction,  in  order  to  ensure 
admissibility of possible evidence in court. 
All  activities  should  be  documented  as  specified  during  the 
documentation process, which is a parallel process as shown 
in Figure 1. 

taken 

to 

the  conclusions  of 

K.  Implementation of assessment results 
This  process  is  concerned  with  the  implementation  of  the 
conclusions from previous process.  Note that this process is 
optional, as it is possible that no changes are needed, based on 
the assessment of implementation process. During this process 
one should decide on recommendations for changes in one or 
more  of  the  previous  processes.  The  main  decision  here  is 
whether  to  go  back  to  one  of  the  planning  processes  in  the 
planning processes group of the readiness class of processes 
or  to  go  back  to  one  of  the  processes  in  the  implementation 
process  group,  depending  on 
the 
assessment of implementation process. 
The following implementation guidelines have been identified 
for  this  process.    This  process  entails  only  the  decision  on 
going back to one of the previous processes. A decision is to 
be made according to the previous process conclusions, while 
taking  into  account  the  aims  of  the  process,  available  time, 
financial and human resources. Furthermore, one can, at this 
point,  perform  a  risk  analysis  in  terms  of  what  are  the  risk 
levels if one does or does not go back to a specific previous 
process. 
All  activities  should  be  documented  as  specified  during  the 
documentation process, which is a parallel process as shown 
in Figure 1. 
The 
implementation guidelines. 

subsection 

following 

discusses 

proposed 

the 

IV.  DISCUSSION 

Our  proposed  implementation  guidelines  for  harmonised 
digital forensic investigation readiness process model [14, 15] 
represent  a  valuable  contribution  to  the  field  of  digital 
forensics, and in particulat digital forensic readiness. It can be 

[5]  Wolfe-Wilson, J. and Wolfe, H.B. (2003); “Management strategies for 
implementing  forensic  security  measures”;  Information  Security 
Technical Report Volume 8, Issue 2. 

[6]  R  Rowlingson  (2004);  “A  Ten  Step  Process  for  Forensic  Readiness”; 

International Journal of Digital Evidence.  

[7]  Gary  Palmer  (2001);  “A  Road  Map  for  Digital  Forensic  Research”; 
Technical  Report  DTR-T001-01,  DFIRWS,  November  2001;  Report 
From the First Digital Forensic Research Workshop (DFIRWS). 

[8]  Carrier B. and Spafford E. (2005); “An Event-Based Digital Forensic 

Investigation Framework”; Digital Investigation 2(2) 2005. 

[9]  Carrier B. and Spafford E. (2003); “Getting Physical with the Digital 
Investigation  Process”;  International  Journal  of  Digital  Evidence  Vol. 
2, 2. 

[10]  Mandia, Kevin, Prosise, Chris, and Pepe (2003); “Incident Response & 
Computer Forensics”; (Second Ed.) McGraw-Hill/Osborne, Emeryville. 
[11]  Nicole  Lang  Beebe,  Jan  Gayness  Clark  (2005);”A  Hierarchical, 
Objectives-Based  Framework  for  the  Digital  Investigations  Process”; 
Digital Investigation 2(2) 2005. 

[12] 

[13] 

Pollitt (2001), “Report on digital evidence”, 13th Interpol Forensic 

Science Symposium, Lyon, France, 2001 

ACPO,  “ACPO  Good  Practice  Guide  for  Computer-Based 

Evidence”, 
http://www.7safe.com/electronic_evidence/ACPO_guidelines_computer
_evidence_v4_web.pdf, last accessed 18.02.2013, 2008 

[14]  Valjarevic  and  Venter  (2013),  “A  Comprehensive  and  Harmonised 

Digital Forensic Investigation Process”, Unpublished journal paper 

[15]  Valjarevic and Venter (2013), “Towards a Harmonised Digital Forensic 
Investigation  Readiness  Process”,  Proceedings  of  Ninth  Annual  IFIP 
WG 11.9 International Conference on Digital Forensics 

used as a holistic guide for implementation of processes within 
digital forensic readiness process. 
The  guidelines  given  cover  each  of  the  processes  within 
comprehensive  harmonised  digital  forensic 
investigation 
process  model.  The  guidelines  represent  addition  to  the 
proposed model and improvement upon it. 
Use  of  the  proposed  guideline  could  bring  multiple  benefits 
for  digital  forensic  practitioners  and  academics.  Possible 
benefits include:  

  Higher admissibility of digital evidence in a court of 
law, due  to  the  fact  that  a  standardized process  was 
used; 

  Human  error  and  omissions  during 

the  digital 
forensic  investigation  readiness  process  would  be 
minimized  once  such  a  harmonised  process  was 
introduced; 

  The  proposed 

implementation  guidelines  would 
enhance  the  efficiency  and  effectiveness  of  digital 
forensic investigations, trough achieveing higer level 
of digital forensic readiness within organisations; 

  Reaching  standardization  in  the  field  of  digital 

forensic investigation process models. 

V.  CONCLUSION 

Let  us  revisit  the  problem  statement.  “There  currently  exists 
no harmonised digital forensic investigation readiness process 
model  nor  there  exist  implementation  guidelines  for  such  a 
process, which can be used as a standardized set of guidelines 
for any organisation.”  
The authors strongly believe that the proposed guidelines are a 
further step towards harmonization of existing digital forensic 
process models and application of such a harmonised model, 
in the area of digital forensic investigation readiness.  
The  proposed  guidelines  should  be  used  by  scientists  and 
practitioners in the field in their attempt to adopt harmonised 
and  standardized  digital 
investigation  process 
readiness model.  
Claims  made  in  this  paper  are  to  be  verified  through  an 
appropriate  prototype  as  future  work.  The  prototype  will 
include  mechanisms 
and 
validation of the proposed guidelines presented.   

verification 

forensic 

the 

for 

 

 
[1] 

REFERENCES 
(2012),  “Information 

 
ISO/IEC  27043 
technology  —  Security 
techniques  —  Investigation  principles  and  processes”,  unpublished 
draft international standard 
[2]  Valjarevic  and  Venter 

(2012),  “Harmonised  Digital  Forensic 
Investigation  Process  Model”,  Proceedings  of  Information  Security 
South Africa 2012 Conference 

[3]  Tan,  J.  (2001);”Forensic  readiness”;  Technical.  Cambridge  USA: 

@stake, Inc. 

[4]  Yasinsac, A. and Manzano, Y. (2001); “Policies to Enhance Computer 
and Network Forensics”; Proceedings of the 2001 IEEE Workshop on 
Information Assurance and Security. 

