Information Security Risk Management in Small-
Scale Organisations: A Case Study of Secondary 

Schools Computerised Information Systems 

 

 

1 Moses Moyo 

1School of Computing Science, UNISA 
P. O. Box 392, Unisa 0003, Pretoria, 

1School of Computing Science, UNISA 
P. O. Box 392, Unisa 0003, Pretoria, 

1School of Computing Science, UNISA  
P. O. Box 392, Unisa 0003, Pretoria, 

1Hanifa.Abdullah 

1Rita C. Nienaber 

South Africa 

Email: mosesm50@gmail.com 

 

South Africa 

Email: abdulh@unisa.ac.za 

 

South Africa 

ritanienaber101@gmail.com  

 

to 

records,  which 

they  are  obliged 

Abstract—The  use  of  computerised  information  systems  has 
become  an  integral  part  of  South  African  secondary  schools, 
bringing  about  a  host  of  information  security  challenges  that 
schools  have  to  deal  with  in  addition  to  their  core  business  of 
teaching and learning. Schools handle large volumes of sensitive 
information  pertaining  to  educators,  learners,  creditors  and 
financial 
secure. 
Unfortunately,  school  management  and  users  are  not  aware  of 
the  risks  to  their  information  assets  and  the  repercussions  of  a 
compromise  thereof.  Computerised  information  systems  are 
susceptible  to  both  internal  and  external  threats  but  ease  of 
access  is  likely  to  manifest  in  security  breaches,  thereby 
undermining  information  security.  One  way  of  enlightening 
schools about the risks to their computerised information systems 
is through a risk management programme. Schools may not have 
information  security  risk 
the 
management  exercises  due 
the  unavailability  of  risk 
management  experts  and  scarce  financial  resources.  Therefore, 
the  objective  of  this  paper  is  to  educate  secondary  schools’ 
management  and  users  on  how  to  perform  a  risk  management 
exercise for  their computerised  information systems  in  order  to 
reduce  or  mitigate  information  security  risks  within  their 
information  systems  and  protect  vital  information  assets.  This 
study  uses  the  Operationally  Critical  Threat,  Asset,  and 
Vulnerability  Evaluation  for  small  organisations  (OCTAVE-
Small)  risk  management  methodology 
these 
information security risks in two selected secondary schools. 

to  perform 
to 

full  capacity 

to  address 

Keywords: 

risk, 
vulnerability,  risk  management,  information  security,  threats, 
exposure, risk assessment, risk analysis.  

computerised 

information 

systems, 

I. 

INTRODUCTION 

The  proliferation  of  computerised  information  systems 
(CISs) in South African secondary schools has implications on 
information security in these organisations. There is no doubt 
that 
those  secondary  schools  using  CISs  experience 
information security risk problems like any other small-scale 
organisation but may not be aware of such problems. Lack of 
proper  risk  management  programmes  may  cause  secondary 
schools 
security 
requirements and this may lead them to use unsanctioned risk 
management  strategies  or  even  abandoning  the  programmes 

information 

overlook 

essential 

to 

to 

altogether.  Risk  management  is  a  crucial  component  of 
information  security  practice  because  its  outcome  forms  the 
basis  upon  which  management  makes  decisions  on  what 
identified  risk  [1].  Therefore, 
action 
undermining 
security 
risks  has  negative 
repercussions on abilities of schools to provide quality service. 
The  continuing  use  of  CIS  in  any  organisation  now  depends 
on  the  quality  of  the  information  security  risk  management 
programme pursued by the organisation. 

take  on  each 
information 

This  paper  proposes  to  conduct  a  risk  management 
exercise in two South African secondary schools, in Vhembe 
District, Limpopo Province. The objective of this exercise is to 
educate school personnel with baseline computing skills who 
use CISs on how to manage information security risks and to 
secure  their  CISs.  The  study  intends  to  utilise  a  qualitative 
case  study  in which  the Operationally  Critical,  Asset,  Threat 
and  Vulnerability  Evaluation 
small  organisations 
(OCTAVE-Small)  risk  management  method  will  be  used  to 
assess  risks  in  the  selected  schools’  CISs.  The  study  will 
customise  the  OCTAVE-Small  processes  to  suit  the  CISs  in 
secondary schools as well as the knowledge and skills of the 
users of these assets. Only CISs users from secondary schools 
with viable CISs will participate in this research study.  

for 

This  paper  is  organised  into  eight  sections.  Section  I 
provides an overview of information security risk management 
in  secondary  schools  CIS.  Section  II,  gives  an  insight  into 
information  security,  highlights  the  security  concerns  in 
secondary schools information systems and suggests a solution 
to  the  inherent  problems.  Section  III  briefly  discusses  risk 
management,  how  to  select  a  risk  management  method  and 
types  of  risk  management  methods.  Sections  IV  and  V 
elucidate  on  the  Operationally  Critical,  Asset,  Threat  and 
Vulnerability  Evaluation 
risk  management 
method  and  explore  its  potential  use  in  secondary  schools.  
Section  VI  examines  the  possible  risk  treatment  approaches 
that schools could possibly apply, depending on the treatment 
strategies  adopted.  Benefits  likely  to  be  derived  from  this 
study  are  dealt  with  in  Section  VII.  The  paper’s  conclusion, 
Section VIII, reflects on the discussions made and highlights 
prospective steps for future research. 

(OCTAVE) 

II. 

INFORMATION SECURITY 

III.  RISK MANAGEMENT 

The  importance  of  information  security  in  secondary 
schools is increasing due to the greater usage of and reliance 
on computerised information systems. Information security is 
the  protection  of  all  elements  that  constitute  an  information 
system,  namely  hardware,  software,  information,  people  and 
processes  [1],[1].  Information  security  is  the  practice  of 
ensuring  that  information  is  only  read,  heard,  changed, 
broadcast and otherwise used by people who have the right to 
do  so  [3].  The  major  goal  of  information  security  in  an 
organisation  is  to  preserve  the  confidentiality,  integrity  and 
availability  of 
the 
protection  of  information  against  theft  and  eavesdropping 
while  integrity  is  the  protection  of  information  against 
unauthorised modification and masquerade [1]. Availability is 
the  dependable  access  of  authorised  users  to  information, 
particularly in light of attacks such as denial of service against 
information systems [5]. Information security requires a range 
of  skills  and  knowledge  that  are  rarely  found  in  small-scale 
organisations  like  secondary  schools,  an  issue  that  this 
research attempts to address.  

[1].  Confidentiality 

information 

is 

A.  Source of security concerns in secondary schools’ 

computerised information systems 
Many secondary schools’ CIS are supported by local area 
networks  (LANs),  which  are  normally  connected  to  the 
Internet to provide access to the web. Personnel with baseline 
computing  knowledge  and  skills  administer  these  CISs. 
Administrative  computers,  holding  vital  and  sensitive  school 
information  relating  to  educators,  learners,  creditors  and 
financial records, are also part of these LANs. Educators and 
learners access these facilities, especially, when browsing the 
web  and  accessing  e-learning  material.  The  extent  to  which 
these 
is  a  matter  of 
conjecture.  There  exists  the  need  to  encourage  and  educate 
information  system  users  in  secondary  schools  to  regularly 
undertake  risk  management  exercises,  in  order  to  reduce  the 
exposure  of  critical  information  assets  to  risks  from  internal 
and external intruders.   

information  systems  are  secured 

B.  Solution to the impending problem 

Secondary  schools  need  to  put  in  place  appropriate 
information security risk mechanisms to safeguard their CISs. 
The  choice  of  information  security  mechanisms  depends  on 
the  threats  and  exploitable  vulnerabilities  that  exist  in  CISs 
[2].  This  implies  that  secondary  schools  should  conduct 
information  security  risk  management  exercises  to  assist  the 
school  management  to  explore  various  information  security 
mechanisms  that  could  be  implemented  in  order  to  sustain 
these  CISs.  However,  most  secondary  schools  neither  have 
expertise nor financial resources to perform risk management 
exercises.  Therefore,  there  is  a  dire  need  for  schools  to  be 
guided  or  assisted  in  performing  risk  management  exercises, 
utilising the risk management methods that have the potential 
to educate users and management on how to manage risks in 
their CISs.  

 

[7],  and 

these  vary 

information 

from  organisation 

An  information  system  asset  is  anything  of  value  an 
organisation needs to utilise in order to accomplish its mission 
[6]. An asset can either be tangible or intangible [5]. Tangible 
assets  include  software,  hardware  and  data  while  intangible 
assets  include  reputation,  operations,  trust  and  morale  [5]. 
Information  systems  assets  can  be  critical  or  non-critical 
depending  on  the  importance  of  the  operations  each  asset  is 
supporting 
to 
organisation  [5].  Information  systems  assets  can  be  at  risk, 
compromising 
integrity,  confidentiality  and 
availability.  A  risk  is  the  potential  that  a  given  threat  will 
exploit vulnerabilities of an asset or group of assets to cause 
loss  or  damage  to  the  asset  [6].  In  this  regard,  a  risk  is  the 
potential for an unwanted event to occur and is a function of 
the  likelihood  of  that  unwanted  event  occurring  and  its 
consequences  [8].  A  risk  arises  from  three  conditions  called 
risk factors (contextual problems), namely the existence of a 
threat  (hazard),  exposure  of  an  asset  to  that  threat  and  the 
vulnerability  of  the  asset  [9].  A  threat  is  a  natural  or  man-
made  occurrence,  individual,  entity,  or  action  that  has  or 
indicates  the  potential  to  harm  information,  operations,  the 
environment,  and/or  property  [1],[10].  The  existence  of  a 
threat implies that there exists the capability and intention of 
an adversary to undertake actions that could be detrimental to 
an  organisation’s  interests  [1].  An  information  security 
exposure  may  be  a  system  configuration  issue,  mistake  in 
software or a problem according to some reasonable security 
policy that allows access to information or capabilities that can 
be used by an attacker as a stepping stone into the system or 
network 
the 
attractiveness  of  a  facility  as  a  target  and  the  level  of 
deterrence  and  (or)  protection  provided  by  the  existing 
countermeasures [12]. Therefore, vulnerability is the degree to 
which  the  exposed  elements  of  an  information  system  will 
suffer a loss from the impact of a threat. All assets are exposed 
to  some  degree  of  risks  which  the  owners  of  assets  may  be 
unaware  of.  Therefore,  by  participating  in  risk  management 
exercises,  CISs  users  in  secondary  schools  will  be  aware  of 
information  assets  that  are  at  risk  and  the  type  of  threats  as 
well as vulnerabilities that lead to risk situations.  

is  a  combination  of 

[11].  Vulnerability 

Risk  management  is  a  basic  management  activity  that 
helps  an  organisation  to  meet  its  objectives  through  the 
allocation of resources to undertake planning, make decisions, 
and  carry  out  productive  activities  [13].  Risk  management 
differs from other management activities because it deals with 
uncertainties  that  an  organisation  faces.  The  uncertainties 
include the occurrence of harmful events and the value to the 
organisation of consequences of such events [13]. Secondary 
schools  are  encouraged  to  carefully  manage  uncertainties 
using  sanctioned  risk  management  methods  that  are  within 
their means.  

The  two  major  activities  of  risk  management  are  risk 
assessment and analysis [7],[1]. Risk assessment is the process 
of identifying, characterising, and understanding risk; that is, 
studying,  analysing,  and  describing  the  set  of  outcomes  and 
likelihoods  for  a  given  endeavor  [10],[14].    Risk  analysis 
involves  further  identification  of  security  risks,  determining 
their  magnitude  and  identifying  the  corresponding  areas  that 

need safeguards [6]. For secondary schools to partake in risk 
management there is a need for the management and users to 
have  basic  knowledge  and  skills  on  these  risk  management 
facets. 

A.  Choice of risk management process 

and 

resource 

expertise-constrained 

The choice of a risk management method depends on the 
understanding and appropriate application of that method in a 
given organisational context. This area is difficult particularly 
to 
small-scale 
organisations  [1].  This  situation  is  even  worse  in  secondary 
schools  where  personnel  with  baseline  computing  skills  are 
only  concerned  with  the  use  of  CISs  regardless  of  the 
perennial  security  risks  associated  with  these  information 
systems  assets.  In  light  of  this,  secondary  schools  need 
assistance  from  within  or  outside  the  organisation  to  initiate 
and guide them in performing risk management for their CIS.  

B.  Types of risk management methods  

information 

security 

institutions  and 

[16].  Quantitative 

Risk  management  methods  can  be  quantitative  or 
qualitative,  depending  on  the  risk  assessment  and  analysis 
applied 
risk 
management  methods  draw  upon  methodologies  used  by 
financial 
insurance  companies  [1],[17]. 
Popular examples of quantitative risk assessment and analysis 
methods include the Annualised Loss Expectancy (ALE) and 
the  Livermore  Risk  Analysis  Methodology 
(LRAM) 
[1],[1],[10]. These methods use numerical results that express 
the  probability  of  each  risk  factor  and  its  effects  on  the 
objectives of  the  organisation  [16]. Quantitative  methods  are 
suitable for large information systems infrastructure supported 
by  strong  human  and  financial  resources  [18].  Organisations 
that  use  quantitative  methods  capitalise  on  these  methods 
objectivity  because  they  depend  on  mathematical  formulae 
that  can  easily  be  verified  [1].  Quantitative  methods  rely  on 
loss  of 
estimations  of 
information  systems  assets  [1],[19].  This  makes 
them 
problematic  to  use  in  small-scale  organisations  such  as 
secondary  schools  where  there  is  no  risk  management 
expertise  to  perform  such  complex  estimations.  Rot  [20] 
argues  that  a  risk  management  exercise  conducted  using 
quantitative method is generally more expensive and demands 
greater  experience  and  more  advanced  tools  than  those 
conducted using qualitative methods. Due to these constraints, 
small  organisations,  like  secondary  schools  lack  the  capacity 
to  use  quantitative  risk  management  methods.  Hence, 
qualitative methods become an alternative. 

the  probability  of  damages  or 

Qualitative  risk  management  involves  the  assessment  of 
the  effects  of  the  identified  risk  factors  and  the  creation  of 
priorities  that  can  be  used  to  decide  on  how  to  solve  the 
potential risk factors, depending on the impact they could have 
on  the  information  systems  assets  [16].  Most  qualitative 
methods  can  be  modified  for  easy  use  with  any  expertise 
available in an organisation [18]. Their simplicity arises from 
the fact that they express risks in terms of descriptive variables 
or  adjectives  instead  of  precise  monetary  terms,  therefore, 
requiring less time, finance and effort to implement [1].  This 
makes  them  simple  because  they  utilise  the  ‘jargon’  which 
non-technical  people  are 
familiar  with.  Furthermore, 

qualitative  methods  are  based  on  judgment,  intuition  and 
experience  of 
the  risk 
management  exercise  [17].  This  makes  qualitative  risk 
management  methods  a  better  choice  for  use  in  secondary 
schools where there are no risk management personnel.  

individual(s)  who  conducts 

the 

(FMECA)  and 

A  number  of  identified  qualitative  risk  assessment  and 
analysis  techniques  also  pose  serious  problems  in  secondary 
schools  due  to  some  complexities.  For  example,  the  Hazard 
And  Operability  study  (HAZOP),  Failure  Mode  and  Effects 
Analysis  (FMEA)  or  Failure  Mode  and  Effects  Criticality 
Analysis 
the  Central  Computer  and 
Telecommunications  Agency,  CCTA-Risk  Analysis  and 
Management  Method  (CRAMM)  require  a  highly  trained 
technical  team  to  perform  risk  assessment  and  analysis,  are 
labour  intensive  or  require  strong  financial  bases  [20].  This 
makes the use of these methods unsuitable for schools due to 
lack  of  these  resources.  However,  not  all  qualitative  risk 
assessment  and  analysis  techniques  require  highly  technical 
people  or  strong  financial  support.  For  example, 
the 
Operationally  Critical  Threat,  Asset  and  Vulnerability 
Evaluation (OCTAVE) technique provides an easy, cheap and 
viable means of achieving the same objectives that any of the 
other methods is capable of [21],[22].   

Among  the  commonly  cited  examples  of  qualitative  risk 
management methods is the OCTAVE, which has been found 
to be the most appropriate for use in organisations where there 
are no experts in information risk management [23]],[18]. 

Some risk management techniques are either too difficult 
to  understand  or  use  by  small-scale  organisations,  with  the 
result  that  these  organisations  may  succumb  to  unsanctioned 
methods  or  avoid  carrying  out  risk  management  exercises 
completely  [23],[1].  To  encourage  secondary  schools  to 
perform  risk  management,  a  simple  and  participatory  risk 
management  method  in  the  qualitative  category,  OCTAVE-
Small, is recommended.  

IV. 

OVERVIEW OF OCTAVE-SMALL  

that 

Secondary schools require risk management methods that 
enable management and users to be acquainted with their CISs 
security issues so that they can improve their security posture 
without  reliance  on  outside  experts.  The  OCTAVE  method 
seems to be the most appropriate choice for this purpose. The 
OCTAVE  risk  management  method  is  a  process-driven 
methodology 
identifies,  prioritises  and  manages 
information security risks within an organisation’s information 
system  [22],[18].  This  method  is  designed  to  provide 
complete  information  for  information  security  risk 
management  [21].  OCTAVE  is  self-directed  because  it 
encourages  people  from  within  the  same  organisation  to 
collaboratively  assume 
the 
organisation’s  security  strategy  [18],  an  outcome  this  study 
seeks to achieve.  

the  responsibility  of  setting 

Variations of the OCTAVE method offer an organisation a 
choice  of  the  risk  management  techniques  suitable  to  the 
organisation  depending  on  the  size  and  layering  of  its 
information systems [18]. Secondary schools typically have a 
flat-layered hierarchical structure, therefore, their information 
systems  can  be  assessed  and  analysed  using  OCTAVE  for 

Small  organisations  (OCTAVE–Small)  method.  Alberts  and 
Dorofee  [21]  and  Sosonkin  [24]  argue  that  by  implementing 
the OCTAVE-Small risk management process, an organisation 
tends to benefit on: a catalogue of practices - a collection of 
good  strategic  and  operational  security  practices;  a  threat 
profile  -  the  range  of  threats  that  an  organisation  needs  to 
consider;  and  a  catalogue  of  vulnerabilities  -  a  collection  of 
vulnerabilities  based  on  platform  and  application.  These 
catalogues  can  act  as  references  for  secondary  schools  that 
decide  to  embark  on  a  risk  management  exercise  using 
personnel with baseline computing skills. 

Process 1

Identify CIS 
critical assets 

Process 2
Identify 
threats to CIS 
critical assets 

and 

the 

skill 

level 

This  study  capitalises  on  the  flexibility  of the OCTAVE-
Small  depicted  by  Figure  1  which  has  been  customised  to 
secondary  schools’  unique  risk  environments,  security  and 
resiliency  objectives 
available. 
Customisation  of  the  conventional  OCTAVE-Small  will 
involve  trimming  the  activities  that  require  extensive  paper 
work like the threat-profile trees in Process 2. These will have 
to  be  replaced  by  simplified  observation  and  inspection 
checklists  based  on  users’  daily  experiences  and  level  of 
understanding. Activities will be rearranged so that there is no 
repetition  of  similar  activities  in  different  processes.  Critical 
information  systems  assets  will  be  determined  in  Process  1 
instead  of  Process  2.  It  is  better  that  while  the  team  is 
identifying  and  locating  assets,  the  team  immediately  selects 
the  critical  assets.  This  is  intended  to  make  the  risk 
management  exercise  user  friendly  and  interesting  to  the 
school personnel and at the same time answering the following 
five basic information security risk questions. 

  What  information  CISs  assets  in  secondary  schools 

require protection? 

  What threats or vulnerabilities should the schools’ CIS 

assets be protected against? 

  What is the level of information security breaches in 

these CIS assets? 

  What level of protection is needed to mitigate risks? 
  What is the impact on a CIS if the existing protection 

fails? 

 

Process 3 
Identify 
vulnerabilities 
in computing 
facilities.  
 

Process 4
Assess risks, 
develop and 
implement 
treatment 
strategies

 

V. 

 
Figure 1: OCTAVE-Small risk management process  

IMPLEMENTING OCTAVE-SMALL METHOD IN 

SECONDARY SCHOOLS 

When using the OCTAVE-Small, a collaborative team has 
the responsibility of conducting risk management exercise in 
selected  schools.  Each  collaborative  team  comprises  of  three 
to five key users of the CISs selected from each school by the 
school  management  in  consultation  with  CISs  users.  Such 
team members are expected to have a deep understanding of 
the operations of their schools. After obtaining approval from 
each School Management Team (SMT) the collaborative team 
will start the implementation of the risk management exercise. 
The  team  leader  leads  the  team,  while  another  member 
documents all daily transactions for each process undertaken. 
The  collaborative  team  will  carry  out  the  activities  as 
described  under  each  process  in  Figure  1.  Data  will  be 
collected  using  observation  and 
inspection  checklists, 
interview  schedules,  customised  OCTAVE-Small  worksheets 
and  some  supplementary  worksheets  designed  for 
this 
purpose.  Data  will  be  qualitatively  processed,  presented  and 
interpreted. 

A.  Process 1: Identifying critical CIS assets and their 

protection requiremnts. 
A collaborative team will comprise  mainly of the regular 
users of the CISs in schools lead by the researcher. The users 
of  the  CISs  in  the  collaborative  team  know  where  different 
information assets are located and will provide all the required 
information about the information assets at their schools. Each 
team  will  then  examine  the security  status  of  each  identified 
critical  asset  taking  into  account  the  immediate  environment 
of  that  asset.  School  information  security  policy  and  other 
related policies will be studied if they are availed. During this 
process the team leader will assist the other members on how 
to  collect  the  necessary  data  and  record  this  data  on  the 
worksheets.  The  team  will  then  construct  a  list  of  critical 

assets for the schools’ CISs. By participating in this process, 
users of CISs will be provided with an opportunity to learn to 
identify  critical  assets  based  on  given  information  about  a 
group of information systems assets.  

B.  Process 2: Identifying threats to critcal CIS assets 

The  main  activity  in  this  process  is  the  checking  of 
existing  protection  mechanisms  that  are  in  place  for  each 
identified critical CISs asset. The team further examines who 
accesses the asset, how it is accessed, when is it accessed, why 
is it accessed in that way, what security breaches are likely to 
take place and their effect on the confidentiality, integrity and 
availability  of  the  information  stored  in  that  asset.  The  team 
leader will also observe how the systems are being used and 
then interview system users. Users of the CISs should be able 
to identify threats to critical assets they are using. 

C.  Process 3: Identifying vulnerabilities in computing 

the  network.  All 

facilities.  
The  team  will  physically  inspect  all  computing  facilities 
concentrating  on  hardware,  systems  software  and  specialised 
application  software  configurations.  Malware  and  simple 
vulnerability scans will be performed on selected workstations 
and 
the 
computing facilities will be documented. Visible threats to the 
assets  will  also  be  documented.  The  team  will  also  examine 
the databases, and network infrastructure in the schools. The 
team  leader  will  educate  the  other  team  members  on  the 
implications of the shortfalls identified. After completing this 
activity, users of CISs should be able to identify and describe 
vulnerabilities in their CISs assets.  

identified  vulnerabilities 

in 

D.  Process 4: Assessing risks, developing and implementing 

treatment strategies. 
The team will assess risks using the information gathered 
in the first three processes. A qualitative risk metric (Table 1) 
[2]  will  be  used  to  guide  the  team  in  this  process.  Risks  or 
threat  sources  are  identified,  analysed  and  their  impact  on 
concerned information systems evaluated too. The matrix uses 
qualitative  descriptive  terms,  high,  medium  and  low  as 
determined  by 
risks  are 
categorised according to their impact on the operations of the 
schools. The team then recommends on what treatment should 
be adopted. Based on these findings, the team will develop a 
protection  strategy  based  on  the  identified  risks  that  each 
school could implement. Upon completing this process, each 
participating user is expected to perform simple risk analysis 
and come up with a protection strategy for an affected asset. 

the  collaborative 

team.  The 

TABLE I.  

QUALITATIVE RISK ANALYSIS MATRIX 

 
CONSEQUENCES 
High 
Medium 
Low 

Key:  H: high risk 
 
 

M: medium risk 
L: low risk 

 

LIKELIHOOD 

Medium 

H 
M 
L 

Low 
M 
L 
L 

High 
H 
H 
M 

VI.  RISK TREATMENT 

Risk  treatment  is  a  process  that  consists  of  selecting  and 
applying  the  most  appropriate  risk  security  measures  or 
controls in order to modify the risk, with the aim of avoiding 
the damages intrinsic to the risk factor or of making use of the 
advantages it could provide to the organisation [24],[14]. This 
study aims to equip all users who participate in the study with 
basic knowledge and skills in risk treatment. Four prominent 
risk  treatment  strategies  that  are  commonly  used,  are  risk 
avoidance,  acceptance,  transference  and  treatment  [7],[1]. 
Before  the  school  management  decides  on  which  risk 
treatment  to  adopt,  the  users  and  management  must  be 
educated  on  the  implication  of  the  option  and  the  likely 
consequences. Central to all risk treatment methods will be the 
role played by the users of CISs to information security risks. 
Based on the outcome of the risk assessment process, the risks 
arising  from  the  users’  contributions  will  be  highlighted  and 
ways of reducing such risks explored.  

VII.  BENEFITS DERIVED 

Security training and awareness among users of CISs is an 
essential component of information security risk management 
for an organisation [21]. This study will provide participants 
with an opportunity to develop an appreciation of information 
security  in  general  and  how  to  manage  risks  associated  with 
their CIS in particular. It will also develop and foster a sense 
of  responsibility  and  accountability  in  those  users  who 
previously were deliberately involved in activities that led to 
security breaches to their schools’ CISs. Schools will have s to 
rely  on  some  individuals  to  improve  their  CIS  security 
posture.  Management  will  utilise 
to  make 
meaningful decisions on CIS risks related issues. 

these  users 

VIII.  CONCLUSION AND FUTURE RESEARCH 
Curtailing information security risks in secondary schools 
should  be  treated  seriously  as  computerisation  in  schools 
escalates. These information systems may become the source 
of future insecurities or platforms from which security threats 
emanate.  Secondary  schools  that  use  CISs  should  remain  as 
secure as possible to safeguard their operations.  

This  paper  discussed  the  prospects  of  conducting  a  risk 
management exercise in secondary schools that use CISs.  The 
research  will  be  carried  out  in  Vhembe  District,  Limpopo 
Province. The purpose of the research is to educate users and 
school  management  on  the  best  practice  of  information 
security  for  their  CIS.  The  research  utilises  a  customised 
OCTAVE-Small  risk  management  process  which  users  with 
baseline  information  technology  skills  and  knowledge  are 
likely  to  appreciate.  CISs  users  who  will  participate  in  this 
study  are  expected  to  receive  basic  information  security  and 
awareness  training  so  that  they  able  to  perform  basic 
information  security  risk  management  in  their  respective 
schools. The final results of this research project/study will be 
reported on in subsequent publications. This study will serve 
as a basis for future research in the use of information systems 
in  small-scale  organisations 
important 
aspects. 
 

looking  at  other 

REFERENCES 

[1]  B.  Karabacaka,  and  I.  Sogukpinar,  “ISRAM:  information  security  risk 
analysis method”. Computers and Security Volume 2003 24, pp. 147 -
159. 
J.  Beachboard,  A.  Cole,  M.  Mellor,  S.  Hernandez  and  K.  Aytes, 
“Improving  information  security  risk  analysis  practices  for  small  and 
medium  sized  enterprises.  A  research  Agenda.”  2008.  Issues  in 
Information Sciences and Technology Volume 5, 73 - 85. 

[2] 

[3]  S.  Elky,  “An  Introduction  to  Information  System  Risk  Management.”  
May  31,  2006  SANS  Institute  InfoSec  Reading  Room  SANS  Institute 
2007. 
from  
http://www.sans.org/reading_room/whitepapers/auditing/introduction-
information-system-risk-management_1204.  (Accessed  on  29  June 
2011). 

Retrieved 

 

[4]  M.  J.  S.  Kite,  “Information  Security  Policy”  2009.  Retrieved    from  

http://www.abdn.ac.uk/hr/uploads/files/information-security-policy.pdf 
(Accessed on 23 June 2012) 

[5]  M.  Theoharidou,  S.  Kokolakis,  M.  Karyda  and  E.  Kiountouzis,  “The 
insider 
the  effectiveness  of 
ISO17799”.  Computers and Security Volume 24, Issue 6, pp 472-484, 
2005, 

information  systems  and 

threat 

to 

[6]  M.  T.  Chen,  “Information  Security  and  Risk  Management.” 
Encyclopaedia of Multimedia Technology and Networking, 2nd ed., M. 
Pagani 
from 
http://lyle.smu.edu/~tchen/papers/info-sec-risks.pdf. 
15 
March 2012). 

Idea  Group  Publishing,  2009.  Retrieved 
(Accessed 

(ed.), 

[7]  Z. Ciechanowicz, “Risk analysis: requirements, conflicts and problems” 
Cornpurer.\  and  Srcuriq,  Vol.  16.  No.  3,  pp.  223-232,  1997.  Elsevier 
Science 
from   
ftp://163.25.117.117/gyliao/TODylan/Risk%20analysis-
%20requirements_conflicts%20and%20problems.pdf    (Accessed  on  23 
January 2013) 

Retrieved, 

1997. 

Ltd. 

 

[8]  L.  Dorian  “Risk  Management:  Understanding  Industry  Insights”,  2012 
Retrieved from http://www.ica.bc.ca/ii/ii.php?catid=17. (Accessed on 25 
February 2012) 

[9]  T. Siu “Information Scecurity Risk management”, 2007. Retrieved From 

http://wiki.edu/information_security_risk_kanagement:Overarching_the
mes. Accessed on 31 March 2011  

[10]  G. Pare, C. Sicotte, M. Jaana and M.S.D. Girouard, “Prioritizing Clinical 
Information System Project Risk Factors” A Delphi Study proceedings 
of the 41st Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, 2008 

[11]  R.K.  Rainer,  C.A.  Snyder  and  H.  H.  Carr,  H.  HRisk  analysis  for 
information  technology.  Journal  of  Management  Information  Systems. 
Volume 8 Numeber 1., 129 – 147, 1991. 

[12]  A. Tiwari, “Information Security Risk Management: An Overview Risk 
Management:  An  Essential  Guide  to  Protecting  Critical  Assets”  2010. 
Retrieved  from  http://www.suite101.com/profile.cfm  (Accessed on 23 
September 2012).  

[13]  N.A.  Renfroe  and  J.L.  Smith,  “Threat/Vulnerability  Assessments  and 
Risk Analysis.” Applied Research Associates, Inc, 2010. Retrieved from   
http://www.wbdg.org/resources/riskanalysis.php#top  (Accessed  on  25 
January 2013) 

 

[14]  J.  Shortreed,  J.  Hicks  and  L.  Craig  “Basic  Frameworks  for  Risk 
Management”, Final Report March  28, 2003 Prepared for The Ontario 
Ministry 
Retrieved 
from 
http://www.irrneram.ca/pdf_files/basicFrameworkMar2003.pdf. 
(Accessed on 26 May 2012)  

Environment, 

2003. 

the 

of 

[15]  K.  J.  Soo  Hoo,  “How  much  security  is  enough?  A  risk-Management 
approach  to  computer  security”  -  A  working  paper.  Consortium  for 
research  on  Information  security  and  Policy.  2000.  Retrieved  from 
http://wwww.cisac.stanford.edu/publications/how_much_is_enough__a_
risk_management_approach_to_computer_ security.pdf.   (Accessed on 
14 February 2011). 

[16]  V.  Mazareanu,  “Risk  Management  and  Analysis:  Risk  Assessment 
Qualitative 
from  
http://papers.ssrn.com/sol13/papers.cfm?abstractid=1549186.  (Accessed 
on 2 September 2011) 

and  Quantitative” 

Retrieved 

2007. 

 

[17]  C.C. Lo, and W.J. Chen, “A hybrid information security risk assessment 
procedure  considering  interdependences  between  controls”.  Expert 
Systems with Applications 39 247–257, 2012 

[18]  P.  Panda,  “The  OCTAVE  approach  to  information  security  risk 
assessment. Journal of Past Issues  Vol 4, pp. 20 - 25 , 2009. Retrieved  
from 
http://www.isaca.org.Journal/past-
issues/2009/volume4/documents/jpdf09-OCTAVE.pdf    (Accessed  on  2 
May 2013) 

[19]  T.  Ding,  “Quantitative  Risk  Analysis  Step-by-step.  GSEC  Practical 
from  

Version”, 
http://www.sans.org/reading_room/whitepapers/auditing/quantitative-
risk-analysis-step-by-step_849. (Accessed  on 12 April  2011). 

Retrieved 

2002.. 

[20]  A. Rot, “IT Risk Assessment: Quantitative and Qualitative Approach”. 
World Congress on Engineering and Computer Science WCECS pp. 22-
24. San Francisco: SANS, 2008. 

[21]  C. Alberts and A. Dorofee,  “Managing information security risks: The 

OCTAVE SM approach”. Boston: Addison-Wesley Anderson, 2002. 

[22]  C.  Alberts  and  A.  Dorofee,  “Using  Vulnerability  Assessment  Tools  to 
Develop an OCTAVE Risk Profile”. SAN InforSecurity 2004. Retrieved 
from 
http://www.fish.com/satan/admin-guide-to-cracking.html. 
(Accessed on 25 February 2011) 

[23]  C. Alberts and A. Dorofee,  “An introduction to OCTAVE SM Method” 
2001. 
from  
http://www.cert.org/octave/methodintro.htm/#intro.    (Accessed  on  25 
February  2011 )  

Retrieved 

[24]  M.  Sosonkin,  “OCTAVE:  Operationally  Critical  Threat,  Asset  and 
Vulnerability  Evaluation”,  CS996:  Information  Security  Management 
Polytechnic 
from 
http://isis.poly.edu/courses/cs996-management-
s2005/Lectures/octave.pdf (Accessed on 25 September 2012). 

University, 

Retrieved 

2005. 

[25]  J.  Shortreed,  “ISO  31000  –  Risk  Management  Standards”,  2008. 
from  http://www.irr-neram.ca/pdf_files/ISO%2031000.pdf  

Retrieved 
(Accessed on 27 May 2012 

 

 

