Paul Tarwireyi 

Univesity of Fort Hare 

East London, South Africa 

ptarwireyi@gmail.com 

 
 

 
 
 

Information Security Competence Test with Regards 

to Password Management 

 

Department of Information Systems 

Department of Information Systems 

Stephen Flowerday 

University of Fort Hare 
East London, South Africa 

sflowerday@ufh.ac.za 

Anass Bayaga 

Department of Information Systems 

University of Fort Hare 
East London, South Africa 

abayaga@ufh.ac.za 

Abstract—  It  is  widely  acknowledged  that  when  it  comes  to  IT 
security the human factor is usually the weakest link. In an effort 
to  strengthen  this 
link,  most  CIO’s  are  embracing  the 
deployment  of  security  awareness  programmes.  It  is  accepted 
that these programmes can create an information security-aware 
culture where security risks can be reduced. Even though work 
has  been  done  in  ensuring  that  these  programmes  include 
mechanisms  for  changing  behaviour  and  reinforcing  good 
security  practices,  there  is  a  lack  of  work  on  measuring  the 
effectiveness  of  such  programmes.  Competence  based  questions 
have long been used in HR to select employees with the skills that 
are necessary to perform effectively in a job.  Competence based 
tests focus mainly on the behaviours and traits critical for success 
on the job and how they have been demonstrated in the past. This 
current paper presents the description of an approach that uses 
competency  based  behavioural  questions  to  measure  security 
competence  levels  at  a  university  with  regards  to  password 
management. A sample of 140 students participated in the study.  
The  findings  revealed  that  even  though  students  were  aware  of 
the  procedures,  many  failed  to  implement  them.  For  example, 
48.6% of students would share their passwords even though they 
know  it  was  wrong.  It  was  also  found  that  there  is  a  positive 
relationship between the year of study and the creation of strong 
passwords (n=140; r=+0.268; p=0.007). 

Keywords-  Information  Security  Behaviour,  Information 

Security Awareness, Password Management 

I.   

INTRODUCTION 

An information system is composed of technology, people 
and processes. It therefore follows that any effort to secure this 
system  should  regard  all  the  system  components  as  equally 
important and should also identify how these components are 
intertwined.  This  means  that  a  holistic  approach  to  security, 
which integrates technology, people, and processes, needs to be 
taken. However, in many cases, the solutions being produced 
are technical in nature. They involve the deployment of trusted 
technical  infrastructure  and  reliable  internal  processes  [1]. 
Research  has  shown  that  an  over-reliance  on  technology 
without the integration or consideration of other factors such as 
the  human  factor,  usually  does  not  yield  the  desirable  results 
[2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [7]. 

Accordingly, even the best technical solutions are of little 
value if insiders do not follow sound security procedures. This 

means that after the implementation of technical solutions, the 
human  factor  needs  to  be  managed  –  aligning  people  and 
practices  with  security  goals.  The  human  factor  specifically 
refers  to  people  who  are  within  the  organization  [2].  This 
encompasses  company  directors,  employees  and  interns  [8].  
According  to  the  2010  Data  Breach  Investigation  Report  by 
Verizon [8], insiders are responsible for the larger proportion 
of  data  breaches  within  organisations,  such  as  misuse  of 
information assets. Hackers usually exploit the weakest link in 
the organization’s IT security, the human factor. This is often 
done  by  using  various  social  engineering  techniques  to  lure 
employees  into  divulging  information  or  to  unintentionally 
give the hacker access to information [5] [9] [10].  

This  necessitates 

that  organisations  develop  security 
awareness programmes that can create an information security-
aware culture where the security risks posed by insiders can be 
reduced.  These  mechanisms  should  focus  on  changing 
employee  behaviour or  reinforcing  good  security  practices  so 
that  a  security-aware  culture  can  develop  [11].  ICT  security 
awareness  programs  are  regarded  as  the  key  defence  in  the 
fight against security incidents that involve humans [1]. 

Even  though  work  has  been  done  in  ensuring  that  these 
programmes  include  mechanisms  for  changing behaviour and 
reinforcing  good  security  practices,  work  on  measuring  the 
effectiveness of such programmes is still in its infancy [10].  

Therefore,  it  is  difficult  to  manage  something  that  is  not 
measured. When a doctor is trying to assess whether one has 
high  blood  pressure,  he/she  measures  your  blood  pressure  in 
order  to  make  a  decision.  Just  as  technological  solutions  are 
measured using metrics such as intrusion attempts, uptime and 
downtime; security competence levels can also be measured. 

The  primary  objective  of  this  paper  is  to  present  the 
findings  of  a  study  that  examined  password  management 
practices  of  140  students  at  a  university.  Passwords  were 
chosen as the subject matter because it was felt that they are a 
good  starting  point  for  information  security  and  that  all 
participants understand what passwords are. 

The  remainder  of  the  paper  consists  of  the  following 
sections. Section 2 provides a theoretical background while the 
empirical  work  is  described  in  section  3.  Section  4  discusses 

the way forward and Section 5 concludes the paper with some 
general comments. 

II.   

THEORETICAL BACKGROUND 

the  end-user  security  behaviour, 

Even though there have been advances and several success 
stories  in  technical  security  solutions,  the  area  of  end-user 
security continues to lag behind. It is widely believed that by 
addressing 
information 
systems  security  will  become  more  proactive  than  reactive 
[10].  With  the  advances  in  security  technologies,  security 
behaviours  such  as  patch  management  and  antivirus  updates 
are  now  being  automated  to  reduce  the  burden  on  users. 
However,  there  are  some  behaviours  such  as  email  and 
password  habits  that  cannot  be  automated  and  are  often 
addressed  through  the  use  of  security  awareness  programmes 
[5] [10] [6] [12]. 

Security awareness is defined as the knowledge and attitude 
that employees of an organisation have regarding the protection 
of information assets of that organisation [5]. Being security-
aware  implies  an  understanding  of  the  risks  associated  with 
organisational  information  assets  and  how  to  safeguard  these 
assets.  Security  awareness  programmes  help 
to  make 
information security part and parcel of the internal controls that 
govern operations and processes in an organisation. 

Information security is a diverse area with many topics. The 
importance  of  each  topic  varies  from  one  organisation  to 
another depending on the nature of risks faced. For example, 
phishing  is  of  more  concern  in  financial  institutions,  while 
most  organisations  share  concerns  over  passwords  [8]. 
Authentication is one of the most important mechanisms used 
to restrict access to information assets [13]. Passwords remain 
one of the most commonly used authentication methods for IT 
systems. It was estimated that in 2009, 86% of companies in 
the  USA  used  password  authentication  [14].  The  literature 
reviewed provides many examples of good password practices. 
Changing default passwords, creating strong passwords and not 
sharing passwords are some of the practices that users have to 
adopt  as  part  of  good  password  behaviour  [13]  [14][15]  [16] 
[10]. 

As stated, this study focuses on the assessment of password 
management practices of undergraduate students in a university 
environment (cf. introduction). Nowadays, universities operate 
in  a  similar  manner  to  other  businesses.  They  rely  on  ICT 
facilities  for  many  of  their  critical  tasks  such  as payroll, HR, 
registration,  examination  and  fees.  Students  make  use  of  the 
university’s  network  and 
to  practise  good 
password  behaviour  as  a  habit  can  compromise  the  integrity, 
confidentiality and availability of the university’s information 
[17].  Moreover,  universities  and  other  vocational  training 
institutions are amongst the top suppliers of skilled employees 
to the labour market. It is therefore important to determine if 
their  education  equips  students  with  the  necessary  skills 
required to enter the workplace and the ‘cyber world’. 

their  failure 

According  to  the  Conscious  Competence  Learning  Model 
which describes the stages of learning a new skill or behaviour, 
learning can be classified into four distinct stages [18]. At the 
first  stage,  unconscious  incompetence,  people  are  not  aware 
of the skills that are required from them whilst at the second 

stage,  conscious  incompetence,  they  are  aware  of  the  skills 
they should possess but have not acquired those skills yet. At 
the third stage, conscious competence, even though they have 
acquired the skills they need to possess, they still need to pay 
attention  when  performing  these  skills.  At  the  final  stage, 
unconscious  competence,  people  have  perfected  performing 
the skills such that they no longer have to think about how to 
perform the skills [18].  
 

 

Figure 1. Conscious competence learning matrix [19] 

 

NIST  presented  the  IT  Security  Continuum,  a  role-based 
model  which  defines  the  IT  security  learning  needed  as  a 
person  assumes  different  roles  within  an  organisation  [20]. 
This  model  is  based  on  the  premise  that  learning  is  a 
continuum. The model has three stages and follows a bottom 
up approach, where its first stage is “Security Awareness”. As 
shown in Figure 2, security awareness is explicitly required for 
all  employees  in  an  organisation  whereas  the  second  stage, 
“Security Basics and Literacy” which provides the foundation 
for subsequent training, is required for all those employees who 
are  involved  in  any  way  with  IT  systems  [20].  Obviously,  in 
today’s terms this means all employees within an organisation 
should be at this level. 

These two models present a stratified view of the levels of 
skills  and  knowledge;  however, 
the 
assessment  criteria  or  metrics  which  can  be  used  to  classify 
employees  into  their  respective  strata  based  on  their  level  of 
knowledge or on their behaviour.   

they  do  not  give 

Some  authors  have  used  different  techniques  such  as 
knowledge  and  attitude  amongst  others  to  assess  Internet 
Security Awareness and Culture in Organisations [21]. But this 
study  is  based  on  the  premise  that  knowledge,  attitude  or 
simply being aware is not enough. It is how one behaves that 
matters.  This  view  is  that  since  an  organisation’s  success  or 
failure effectively depends on things that its employees do or 
fail to do, the information security strategy in the organisation 
should pay close attention to employee behaviour [1].  

Behaviour involves making decisions on how to respond to 
stimuli. Misbehaviour which is usually a result of bad decision 
making  can  be  discouraged  through  punishment  while  good 
behaviour  can  be  encouraged  through  reinforcement  [22]. 
Behaviour  is  a  philosophy  of  psychology  which  refers  to  all 

things  that  organisms  do  in  response  to  certain  stimuli  [22].  
Behaviour  can  be  classified  into  two  main  categories,  overt 
behaviour and private experiences [23]. 
 

Figure 2. The IT Security Continuum [20] 

 

 

 

 

Overt behaviour can be described as the way people can be 
observed to demonstrate, while private experiences are things 
that  take  place  in  a  person’s  mind.  Thus,  behaviour  can  be 
represented using the formula: 

Behaviour = Overt behaviour + Private experiences 

 

 

From this deduction, the authors are of the opinion that one 
can  effectively  evaluate  the  security  competence  of  an 
individual by assessing the way they behave in certain security 
scenarios.  Depicting  normal  behaviour  consistently  usually 
implies  having  the  appropriate  knowledge,  but  having  the 
relevant knowledge does not imply normal behaviour. Normal 
behaviour  in  the  case  of  students  means  that  the  students  are 
listening and acting on measures to prevent, deter, detect and 
defend against information security breaches [13]. 

Whilst awareness and culture are equally  important,  more 
emphasis  should  be  put  on  monitoring  behaviour  so  that 
effective  behaviour  modification 
can  be 
implemented. It is therefore important to develop an approach 
that  comprehensively  measures  behaviour.  In 
this  case; 
password management behaviour. 

techniques 

To determine the password behaviour a survey of password 
management  practices  of  students  was  carried  out.  The 
information  gathered  was  used 
the  assessment  and 
identification of areas of weakness and strength. The approach 

in 

followed  in  this  assessment  provides  a way  of  measuring  the 
information  security  competence  levels.  This  measurement 
approach  can  be  used  either  to  benchmark  the  security 
competence level before a security awareness programme or to 
measure the effectiveness of such programmes.  

The next section describes the research methodology used 

and the measurement approach that was developed. 

III.   

COMPENTENCE BASED QUESTIONS: EMPERICAL WORK 
This current study ascertains the security competence levels 
of  university  students  with  regards  to  password  management. 
To  achieve 
this,  an  anonymous  questionnaire  using 
competency based behavioural questions, was administered to 
first year students - those coming straight from matric and final 
year  students  –  those  who  are  completing  their  degree 
programmes and ready to enter the workplace.  

Competence based questions have long been used in HR to 
select  employees  with  the  skills,  necessary  to  perform 
effectively in the job [24] [25]. These skills are usually referred 
to  as  key  competencies.  Competence  is  the  ability  to  apply 
knowledge,  skills,  abilities  and  traits  to  perform  tasks  in  an 
efficient and effective manner that yields desirable results [25].  
Competence based tests focus on the behaviours and traits 
that  are  critical  for  success  on  the  job  and  how  they  were 
demonstrated in the past. This is an effective way to uncover 
behavioural  facets  of  an  individual  in  a  quick  and  precise 
manner [26]. It is important to note that behavioural questions 
do not look for opinion, but rather seek past behaviour. Some 
of the advantages cited for this approach are [27]: 

It reduces misunderstandings about past experience 

 
  Reduces effort to make a good impression 
  Provides  actual  examples  of  knowledge,  skills  and 

attributes 

  Provides  direct  evidence  of  the  actual  state  of  an 

 

individual’s competence  
It  also  promotes  consistency  in  interviews  and 
assures all key areas for success are covered. 

For  example:  competence  based  questions  have  also  been 
long  used  in  nursing  schools  for  determining  the  ability  and 
readiness  of  health  workers  to  provide  quality  services 
[28][29][30][31].  This  current  study  uses  competence  based 
questions to determine information security competence. 

Participants  were  asked  questions  that  allowed  them  to 
choose  options  that  best  describe  their  behaviour  in  the 
following password management areas. 

  Sharing passwords with friends 
  Storage of passwords 
  How often passwords are changed 
  Using the same password for multiple accounts 
  Choosing the “remember” password option and 

  Using default passwords. 

An example of questions that were used to assess students' 

behaviour on how they kept passwords is given below. 

In  terms  of  a  new  password.  How  do  you  store  your 

password if you don’t want to forget it? 

The options which students were given to choose from and 

frequencies of their answers are illustrated in table 1. 

 

TABLE 1: HOW PASSWORDS ARE KEPT 

 

 

 

Literature was reviewed in order to ensure the survey fully 
captured and represented the concept under study thus ensuring 
content validity [13] [14][15]. Furthermore, before the survey 
was administered, it was sent to a small test group within the 
target  population  to  ensure  that  we  were  asking  the  right 
questions and this helped to refine the research instrument. 

A.  Data Analysis and Interpretation 

There were 140 usable responses. 73 responses were from 
first  year  students  whilst  67  responses  came  from  third  year 
students.  These  questionnaires  were  analysed 
in  SPSS 
(Statistical Package for the Social Sciences) for correlation and 
other measures. The levels of competence at the different years 
of study were compared and conclusions were drawn regarding 
the level of password management competence of each group. 
Those students who exhibited good behaviour can be regarded 
as being competent whilst the others are said to have not yet 
reached the required password management competence level. 

B.  Research Findings 

in 

In this section the main research findings are presented. The 
research  objective 
this  study’s 
measurement  method  was  to  investigate  if  there  was  a 
relationship  between 
the  year  of  study  and  security 
competence.  In  answering  this  question,  it  was  important  to 
address the following: 

the  application  of 

  Are  third  year  students  generally  more  competent 

than first year students? 

  Which areas noted the greatest improvement? 
  Which area is of greatest concern? 

The data analysis revealed that 38.4% (n = 73) of first year 
students  will  share  their  passwords  whilst  59.7%  (n  =  67)  of 
third year students will do the same. Of these figures, 19.2% 
and 22.4% of first years and third years respectively will share 
their passwords even though they know there is a risk. 

There is a weak negative relationship between the year of 
study and sharing passwords (n=140; r = -0.295, p=0.021). It 
is  the  authors’  view  that  this  is  probably  a  compliance  issue; 
more  third  years  than  first  years  will  share  their  passwords 
even though they know it is against the security policies (first 
years  are  more  compliant  than  their  seniors).  These  results 
resonate  with  the  findings  of  another  study  which  was 
conducted in a mining company where a 60% behaviour level 
was also noted on sharing passwords [32].  

Further  evidence  suggests  that  first  year  students  create 
weaker passwords than third year students. Almost two thirds, 
(63%)  of  first  year  students  compared  to  41.8%  third  year 
students.  This  probably  suggests  that  the  years  spent  in 
university  have  taught  them  to  improve  their  password 
strength. Because humans have limited capacity to remember 
passwords,  one 
to  create  simple  and  predictable 
passwords [14]. 

tends 

 There is a relatively weak positive relationship between the 
year  of  study  and  the  creation  of  strong  passwords  (n=140; 
r=+0.263, p=0.007). 

Additionally,  the  evidence  suggests  that  69.9%  first  year 
students do not change their default passwords, whilst 40.3% 
third  years  also  do not  change  default  passwords.  This  might 
also suggest that the years spent in university have taught the 
students to change default passwords. 

There is a positive relationship between the year of study 
and  the  changing  of  default  passwords  (n=140;  r=+0.268, 
p=0.001). 

Table  2  below  summarises  the  relationships  between  the 
year  of  study  and 
the  different  password  management 
competencies. No relationships were noted between the year of 
study  and  how  often  passwords  were  changed,  storage  of 
passwords,  using  the  same  passwords  and  choosing  the 
“remember” password option. This might be an indication that 
student behaviour in these areas does not change significantly 
from first year to third year. 

Over  two  thirds  of  students  (71.4%)  were  generally 
competent in their password storage practices. However, 15% 
of the students wrote their passwords down. This is in line with 
another  research  which  reported  that  15-20%  of  users  wrote 
down  their  password  on  a  note  attached  to  the  computer 
monitor on a regular basis [14]. 

Besides  the  year  of  study,  the  field  of  study  was  also 

considered.  

For  first  year  students,  there  was  no  relationship  between 
field  of  study  and  the  password  management  competencies. 
However,  at  third  year  it  was  noted  that  students  who  were 
studying towards IT related degrees created stronger passwords 
than  students  from  other  degrees  (n=67;  p=0.038).  Also  in 
general,  students  doing  IT  related  degrees  were  found  to  be 
more competent than others. 

TABLE  2:  RELATIONSHIPS  BETWEEN  YEAR  OF  STUDY  AND 
PASSWORD COMPETENCIES 

 

 
The results also show that doing computers at high school 
did  not  make  any  difference  in  the  password  management 
practices of students.  

Figure 3: Student behaviour on changing default passwords 

 

On 

the  relationship  between 

the  different  password 
management  competencies,  it  was  found  that  people  who  do 
not  change  default  passwords  also  do  not  frequently  change 
r=+0.38;  p<0.001). 
their  other  passwords 
Furthermore,  these  areas  were  also  found  to  be  the  most 
problematic areas in terms of password management behaviour 
with  55.7%  and  74.3%  students  respectively  failing  to 
demonstrate  good  password  behaviour.  Figure  3  and  4; 
illustrate how the students behaved in these areas. 

(n=140; 

Further  evidence  suggests  that  about  three  quarters  of  the 
students do not change their passwords often, regardless of the 
year of study or field of study.  

To  answer  the  first  sub  question,  on  average,  47.4%  first 
year  student  responses  were  on  the  competent  side  of  the 
spectrum as compared to 60.8% of third years. This shows an 
overall 13.4% improvement in competence. From this statistic 
it  is  evident  that  about  39.2%  third  year  students  leave 
university  without  having  achieved  the  required  password 
management competence levels. 

 

 

 

Figure 4: Student behaviour: How often passwords were changed 

 

 
Improvements 

management are shown in Table 3 that follows. 

in 

the  respective  areas  of  password 

The  greatest 

improvement,  29.6%  was  observed 

in 
changing  default  passwords,  whilst  15.2%  was  noted  in 
password  strength  and  14.4%  was  noted  in  choosing  the 
remember password option when logging to systems. 

TABLE  3:  COMPARISON  OF  AVERAGE  COMPETENCE 
PERCENTAGE BETWEEN DIFERENT YEARS OF STUDY 

a)  Distinction 
b)  Credit 
c)  Pass 
d)  Fail 

 
These  scales  can  be  mapped  to  the  different  quadrants  of 
the  Conscious  Competence  Learning  Matrix  [19]  and  where 
appropriate, action needs to be taken to move users from one 
quadrant to the other. 

TABLE 4: COLORED CODED SCHEME SCALE (ADAPTED FROM 

[32]) 

Competent: No action required 

>=80 

Average: Action maybe required 

70 - 79 

 

Semi -average :Action required 

60 - 69 

Poor: Action required 

<=59 

 

  

  

  

  

 
Using  the  same  technique,  this  concept  can  be  applied  to 
assess  the  effectiveness  of  a  security  awareness  program, 
thereby providing a measurement tool. 

IV.  

THE WAY FORWARD 

The results are promising because they allow one to draw 
conclusions between the levels of competence at the different 
years  of  study  and  to  identify  the  relationships  between 
password behaviour and levels of study. 

Nonetheless,  research  is  still  needed  to  enhance  this 
measurement  approach.  The  approach  should  be  applied  in  a 
different setting to assess the information security competence 
of  different  groups.  Since  passwords  are  only  a  part  of 
information security management, it should also be applied to 
other  areas  such  as  social  engineering  and  phishing. 
Furthermore, future work will also focus on enhancing the data 
collection strategies. Instead of relying on one question per sub 
area, it might be important to ask a number of questions so that 
accurate behaviour in that area can be learnt.  

This  can  also  be  used  as  a  valuable  tool  for  measuring 
security competence before and after the implementation of a 
security  awareness  program  to assess  the  effectiveness  of  the 
program.  

The results from this method can also be triangulated with 
results  from  other  metrics  from  audit  reports  such  as  the 
number of students who do not change default passwords, and 
number of people who use weak passwords.   

As  a  way  of  stratifying  these  levels  of  competence,  this 
study employs a coloured scheme scale which has four levels. 
These scales are based on standard examination grading scales 
such as: 

 

Using  this  scheme,  the  overall  competence  of  students  at 
third year level is illustrated below. Table 5 shows that students 
have  not  reached  the  required  levels  of  competence;  hence, 
behaviour changing intervention mechanisms are needed.  

TABLE 5: GRADED COMPETENCE LEVELS AT THIRD YEAR 

Password Competence   Competent 
percentage  

  

   

3rd years  

Colour 

 Sharing Passwords  
Storage of passwords  
Changing passwords  

Using the same password for 
different accounts  

Choosing the remember 
password option  

Password strength  
Default passwords  

 40.3  
74.7 
20.9 

53.8 

76.1 

52.2 
59.7 

  
  
  

  

  

  
  

 
According to this coloured scheme scale, one can conclude 
that  students  generally  employ  poor  password  management 
practices  and  therefore  are  at  the  bottom  level,  “Security 
Awareness”, of the IT Security Continuum [20]. However, in 
this information technology era, all employees need to be at the 

“Security  Basics  and  Literacy”  stage.  This  also  suggests  that 
action  needs  to  be  taken  if  students  are  going  to  leave 
university with the required security competencies. 

This  means  security  awareness  programmes  which 
emphasis the areas identified as most problematic, need to be 
implemented.  Through 
regular  measurement/feedback, 
competence in these areas can be improved. 

V.  

CONCLUSION 

Security  awareness  programmes  employ  mechanisms  that 
focus  on  reinforcing  good  security  practices  and  changing 
employee security behaviour. However, the implementation of 
such  programmes  does  not  mean  that  all  employees  will 
automatically become security competent. Knowledge, attitude 
or simply being aware is not enough. It is how one behaves that 
affects  security.  It  is  therefore  necessary  to  have  a  way  of 
measuring the extent to which good security practices can be 
reinforced.  With  a  structured  measurement  approach, 
it 
becomes easy to monitor the security practices of users. 

This paper describes the development and application of a 
security  competence  measurement  approach 
that  uses 
competency  based  behavioural  questions  at  a  South  African 
university.  Behavioural  questions  are  an  effective  way  to 
uncover the behavioural facets of an individual in a quick and 
precise manner [26]. They do not look for opinion or attitude, 
but  rather  examine  past  behaviour  and  this  provides  direct 
evidence of the actual state of an individual’s competence. 

The  approach  was  successfully  applied  to  measure  the 
security  competence  levels  of  students  at  different  years  of 
study  with  regards  to  their  password  management  practices. 
The findings are encouraging, and it is intended, to apply the 
approach  to  other  security  areas  such  as  phishing  and  to 
implement measures that enhance the validity and reliability of 
the data collected. 

REFERENCES 

 

 A.  Da  Veiga  and  J.  H.  P.  Eloff,  “A  framework  and  assessment 
instrument  for  information  security  culture,”  Computers  &  Security, 
vol. 29, no. 2, pp. 196-207, Mar. 2010. 
 C. Colwill, “Human factors in information security: The insider threat 
-  Who  can  you  trust  these  days?,”  Information  Security  Technical 
Report, vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 186-196, Nov. 2009. 
 S.  Furnell  and  K.-L.  Thomson,  “From  culture  to  disobedience: 
Recognising  the  varying  user  acceptance  of  IT  security,”  Computer 
Fraud & Security, vol. 2009, no. 2, pp. 5-10, Feb. 2009. 
 H.  A.  Kruger  and  W.  D.  Kearney,  “Consensus  ranking  -  An  ICT 
security awareness case study,” Computers & Security, vol. 27, no. 7-
8, pp. 254-259, Dec. 2008. 
 K.-L. Thomson and R. von Solms, “Towards an Information Security 
Competence  Maturity  Model,”  Computer  Fraud  &  Security,  vol. 
2006, no. 5, pp. 11-15, May. 2006. 
 K.-L.  Thomson,  R.  von  Solms,  and  L.  Louw,  “Cultivating  an 
organizational  information  security  culture,”  Computer  Fraud  & 
Security, vol. 2006, no. 10, pp. 7-11, Oct. 2006. 
 D.  Ashenden,  “Information  Security  management:  A  human 
challenge?,” Information Security Technical Report, vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 
195-201, Nov. 2008. 
 W. Baker et al., “Data Breach Investigations Report.” Verizon, 2010. 
 H. Kruger, L. Drevin, and T. Steyn, “A framework for evaluating ICT 
security awareness,” 2006. 

[1] 

[2] 

[3] 

[4] 

[5] 

[6] 

[7] 

[8] 
[9] 

[10] 

[11] 

[12] 

[13] 

[14] 

[15] 

[16] 

[17] 

[18] 

[19] 
[20] 

[21] 

[22] 

[23] 

[24] 

[25] 

[26] 

[27] 

[28] 

[29] 

[30] 

[31] 

[32] 

 

 T.  Herath  and  H.  R.  Rao,  “Encouraging  information  security 
behaviors in organizations: Role of penalties, pressures and perceived 
effectiveness,” Decision Support Systems, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 154-165, 
May. 2009. 
 SANS  27001,  “Informationtechnology  –  security  techniques  – 
information securitymanagement systems – requirements.,” Standards 
South Africa, 2006. 
 E. C. Johnson, “Security awareness: switch to a better programme,” 
Network Security, vol. 2006, no. 2, pp. 15-18, Feb. 2006. 
 B.  Grawemeyer  and  H.  Johnson,  “Using  and  managing  multiple 
passwords:  A  week  to  a  view,”  Interacting  with  Computers,  vol.  In 
Press, Corrected Proof, 2011. 
 T.  V.  Laptyeva,  S.  Flach,  and  K.  Kladko,  “The  weak  password 
problem:  chaos,  criticality,  and  encrypted  p-CAPTCHAs,”  Cornell 
University, Cryptography and security, Mar. 2011. 
 N. Gunson, D. Marshall, H. Morton, and M. Jack, “User perceptions 
of security and usability of single-factor and two-factor authentication 
in  automated  telephone  banking,”  Computers  &  Security,  vol.  In 
Press, Corrected Proof, 2011. 
 D. Nelson and K.-P. L. Vu, “Effectiveness of image-based mnemonic 
techniques  for  enhancing  the  memorability  and  security  of  user-
generated passwords,” Computers in Human Behavior, vol. 26, no. 4, 
pp. 705-715, Jul. 2010. 
 L.  Drevin,  H.  Kruger,  and  T.  Steyn,  “Determinants  of  password 
security: some educational aspects,” IFIP TC3 World Conference on 
Computers in Education, vol. 9, 2009. 
 K.-L.  Thomson,  R.  von  Solms,  and  L.  Louw,  “Cultivating  an 
organizational  information  security  culture,”  Computer  Fraud  & 
Security, vol. 2006, no. 10, pp. 7-11, Oct. 2006. 
 B. Bloom, “Testing & Evaluation.” 2003. 
 M.  Wilson,  D.  E.  de  Zafra,  S.  I.  Pitcher,  J.  D.  Tressler,  and  J.  B. 
Ippolito,  “Information  Technology  SecurityTraining  Requirements:A 
Role- and Performance-Based Model.” National Institute of Standards 
and Technology Gaithersburg, MD 20899-0001, 1998. 
 L. Drevin, H. A. Kruger, and T. Steyn, “Value-focused assessment of 
ICT  security  awareness  in  an  academic  environment,” Computers  & 
Security, vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 36-43, Feb. 2007. 
 P. R. Martin and P. Bateson, Measuring behaviour: an introductory 
guide. Cambridge University Press, 1993. 
 L.  Hauser, 
2005. 
http://www.iep.utm.edu/behavior/. [Accessed: 07-Dec-2010]. 
 V.  Vathanophas  and  J.  Thai-ngam,  “Competency  Requirements  for 
Effective Job Performance in TheThai Public Sector,” Contemporary 
Management Research, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 45-70, 2007. 
 T.  J.  Maurer,  K.  A.  Wrenn,  H.  R.  Pierce,  S.  A.  Tross,  and  W.  C. 
Collins,  “Beliefs  about  ‘improvability’of  career-relevant  skills: 
relevance  to  job/task  analysis,  competency  modelling,  and  learning 
orientation,”  Journal  of  Organizational  Behavior,  vol.  24,  no.  1,  p. 
107–131, 2003. 
 R. S. Mansfield, “Building competency models: Approaches for HR 
professionals” Human Resource Management, vol.35,1, p.7–18, 1996. 
 A.  Lado  and  M.  Wilson,  “Human  resource  systems  and  sustained 
competitive  advantage:  A  competency-based  perspective,”  The 
Academy of Management Review, vol. 19, no. 4, p. 699–727, 1994. 
 D.  T.  Cowan,  D.  Jenifer  Wilson-Barnett,  I.  J.  Norman,  and  T. 
Murrells,  “Measuring  nursing  competence:  Development  of  a  self-
assessment  tool  for  general  nurses  across  Europe,”  International 
Journal of Nursing Studies, vol. 45, no. 6, pp. 902-913, Jun. 2008. 
 T.  McCready,  “Portfolios  and  the  assessment  of  competence  in 
nursing:  A  literature  review,”  International  Journal  of  Nursing 
Studies, vol. 44, no. 1, pp. 143-151, Jan. 2007. 
 L. Weiss Roberts et al., “Assessing medical students’ competence in 
obtaining informed consent,” The American Journal of Surgery, vol. 
178, no. 4, pp. 351-354, Oct. 1999. 
 A. Nikula, H. Nohynek, P. Puukka, and H. Leino-Kilpi, “Vaccination 
competence  of  graduating  public  health  nurse  students,”  Nurse 
Education Today, vol. 31, no. 4, pp. 361-367, May. 2011. 
 H.  Kruger  and  W.  Kearney,  “Measuring  information  security 
awareness:  A  West  Africagold  mining  environment  case  study,” 
Proceedings  of  the  2005  ISSA  Conference,  Johannesburg,  South 
Africa, 2005. 

[Online].  Available: 

“Behaviorism,” 

