Mobile cyber-bullying: A proposal for a pre-emptive 

approach to risk mitigation by employing digital 

forensic readiness 

 

Stephen M Serra 

HS Venter 

Information and Computer Architectures Research Group 

Information and Computer Architecture Research Group 

(ICSA) 

Department of Computer Science 

University of Pretoria 

Email: stephen.serra@gmail.com 

 
 

to 

Abstract— The new age of mobile communication brought on by 
the internet has meant that people now have mobile access to a 
wealth  of  information  and  services.  Although  the  benefits  of 
mobile 
information  access  are  acknowledged  through  the 
empowering influence over its audience, a concern is noted with 
largely  uncensored 
reference 
forums  offering  mobile 
communication exchange to children.  
The proliferation of mobile technologies available, in conjunction 
with  applications  facilitating  social  networking,  has  steadily 
increased the attack surface minors are exposed to in an online 
environment.  Most  minors  engaging  in  online  activities  do  so 
through mobile technologies such as the cell phone. This device, 
as a consequence of its mobility, offers access to the internet that 
circumvents  controls  of  supervision.  This  paper  presents  an 
approach that offers an alternative to existing solutions, available 
to 
static 
configurations.  The  proposed  solution  seeks  to  avail  a  state  of 
digital forensic readiness in order to deliver a proactive solution, 
this  is  accomplished  through  risk  profiling  of  a  user  through 
usage  which  dictates  the  level  of  protection  accordingly.  It  is 
suggested  that  this  proposal  will  benefit  children  engaging  in 
online  interactions  through  the  implementation  of  proactive 
strategies. 
 

the  commercial  market, 

that  are  driven  by 

Keywords-internet, cell phone, children, uncensored forums, cyber 
bullying, digital forensic readiness 

I. 

 INTRODUCTION 

Having a profound influence in the lives of most members 
of a typical family, the internet continues to provide a service 
that offers a myriad of information as well as communication 
gateways to all including even the youngest family members. 

The risk of online access to minors has steadily increased 
due to the ever increasing means of accessibility coupled with 
uncensored content, anonymity and the generation gap between 
parents and their more computer literate children [1]. Seamless 
accessibility to the online environment of the internet is made 
possible  by  the  predominant  technology  in  use  by  children 
today, the cell phone. Although a common technology carried 
by  most  teens  today,  the  cell  phone  is  not  the  first  mobile 

(ICSA) 

Department of Computer Science 

University of Pretoria 
hventer@cs.up.ac.za 

 

in 

risk 

that  some  effort 

technology  to  cause  disruption  [2].  Pagers  were  the  mobile 
technology of choice in the 90’s that introduced a mechanism 
through  which  harassment  could  be  delivered.  While  it  is 
evident 
reduction  has  been 
implemented  by  mobile  network  operators  in  an  attempt  to 
curb  the  risk  to  underage  participants  of  the  network,  further 
work is needed to keep children safe while engaging in online 
activity,  especially  with  reference  to  cyber-bullying  [3]. 
Currently parental control systems are only evident in two of 
the  four  mobile  network  operators  evaluated.  One  of  the  two 
mobile network operators that do offer parental controls do not 
address  user-to-user  messages  and  access  to  user-generated 
content  [4].  Measures  that  have  been  suggested  up  to  date 
appear to be directed more at inappropriate content and user-
defined  blacklists  of  chat-rooms.  There  are  no  ‘home-grown’ 
solutions that have been directed by local studies and research. 
This would lead to solutions that may not be totally effective 
for the local demographic. A perspective followed in this study 
follows  the  premise  of  a  solution  that  is  customized  for  an 
individual  as  opposed  to  blanket-wide  commercial  solutions 
that are generic and equally applied to the subscriber. 

Commitment from government on the issue of cybercrime 
and child-safety was noted with the South African Minister of 
Communications’ media statement on the 16 March 2010 [5], 

 
“Recent reports of children who go missing as a result of 
being lured through cyberspace criminals posing as ‘friends’, 
often resulting in them being murdered is very disturbing and 
requires  a  societal  response.  Police  have  a  duty  to  lead  this 
crusade in ensuring those perpetrators are brought to book “ 

 
The  authors  are  of  the  opinion  that  law  enforcement 
involvement  will  aid  in  the  effectiveness  of  the  proposed 
solution.  

The extent to which children of South Africa are vulnerable 
to  cyber-bullying  via  cell  phone  usage  is  largely  unknown. 
Specific, exploratory research into the extent of how the local 

demographic is affected will aid in methods of remediation that 
are  effective,  both  technologically  and  educationally.  The 
research  is  directed  at  schools  of  historically  disadvantaged 
individuals  in  South  Africa  to  gauge  the  level  of  exposure 
brought on by cyber-bullying via the prominent form of mobile 
technology available, the cell phone. The research further aims 
to bring to the fore an element of risk management that reduces 
the risk through the development of a solution motivated by the 
results of fieldwork as well as both technology and educational 
directives  that  will  also  encompass  collaboration  with  law 
enforcement. 

together 

Law  enforcement  participation  in  conjunction  with  other 
remediation  methods  centered  on  education  and  technology 
will  work 
to  provide  a  proactive  solution. 
Implementing  a  solution  that  preempts  an  attack  of  cyber 
bullying,  through  risk  profiling,  will  provide  a  means  of 
proactively  identifying  a  threat  or  threat  agent  [6]  thereby 
reducing an exposure and resultant impact on the recipient of 
such  an  attack.  This  method  will  allow  law  enforcement  or 
other  end-recipient  of  the  notification  to  be  made  aware 
automatically  allowing  necessary  actions  to  follow  without 
having to launch on a reactive basis. 

The focus and direction of this study was conceived from 
an  observation  that  revealed  inadequate  controls  in  the 
protection of children through mobile technology. 

II.  BACKGROUND 

This  section  commences  with  what  cyber-bullying  is  and 
how it is carried out, the types of cyber-bullying that exist and 
the associated harmful effects of cyber-bullying. Results from 
Pew Research Centre publications [9] are discussed next with 
statistics relevant to teens, cellphones and texting.  

A.  Cyber-Bullying 
Cyber-bullying 

the  ability 

is  a  manifestation  of 

to 
communicate  anonymously,  without  fear  of  reprisal.  The 
ability to project oneself differently in a light that may contrast 
one’s real-life scenario may be beneficial for a timid individual 
that is bullied in the real-world. This individual may mask their 
demeanour  on-line  in  order  to  seek  revenge  on  those 
individuals for transgressions in the real world. [7] 

4.  Outing  and  trickery:  Disseminating  intimate  private 
information or talking someone into disclosing private 
information which is then disseminated. 
Impersonation:  Pretending  to  be  someone  else  and 
posting material to damage that person’s reputation. 

5. 

6.  Exclusion:  Intentionally  excluding  someone  from  an 

online group. 

7.  Cyber  stalking:  Creating  fear  by  repeatedly  sending 
offensive  messages  and  engaging  in  other  harmful 
online activities. 

The  harmful  effects  of  cyber-bullying  are  exacerbated,  in 
comparison to traditional schoolyard bullying, due to the fact 
that the harassment is continuous and does not stop. The cell 
phone  is  a  direct  portal  to  the  victim  due  to  the  close 
association the victim has with his/her cell phone. The result of 
a  continuous  barrage  of  harassment  may  lead  to  the  victim 
suffering  serious  consequences  related 
to  psychological 
challenges that could also lead to difficulties in later life. 

Lenhart [9] indicates in a research report by Pew Research 
Centre  that  cell  phone  texting  has  become  the  preferred 
channel  of  basic  communication  between  teens  and  their 
friends. According to Pew Research Centre, some 75% of 12-
17 year olds now own cell phones, up from 45% in 2004. The 
research report goes on to indicate that one in three teens sends 
more  than  100  text  messages  a  day,  or  3000  texts  a  month. 
These alarming statistics bring to the fore the mainstream use 
of this mode of communication and susceptibility to malicious 
use.  Figure  1  by  Lenhart  [9]  reflects  the  percentage  of  teens 
who  contact  their  friends  daily  by  different  methods,  by  age. 
High percentages are noted for children as young as 12 to 17 
years  in  respect  of  text  messaging  and  instant  messaging. 
Extensive use must be aligned to adequate controls to ensure 
non malicious use. 

 

Cyber-bullying  may  occur  through  a  number  of  avenues 
such  as  web  sites,  blogs,  discussion  forums,  chat,  instant 
messaging, voice, or text [8]. This paper focuses on the threat 
of communication facilitated by cell phone usage directly to the 
victim,  such  as  instant  messaging  and  short  message  service 
(SMS),  but  takes  into  consideration  the  usage  pattern  of  the 
user or potential victim into consideration. 

Willard [8] identified the following types of cyber-bullying: 
1.  Flaming: Angry, rude comments. 
2.  Harassment: Repeatedly sending offensive messages. 
3.  Denigration:  Spreading  rumours  or  posting  false 

information of others online. 

Figure 1 - percentage of teens who contact their friends 

daily by different methods, by age 

 

 

III. 

INDICATORS FOR RISK REDUCTION 

This  section  provides  descriptions  of  why  outputs  of  this 
research  are  fundamental  to  reducing  the  risk.  While  it  is 
recognized that full risk elimination is not possible, this paper 
assumes  the  perspective  that  the  risk  must  be  reduced  to  an 
acceptable level. 

A.  Expansion of mobile technology available to minors  

of 

the 

concept 

revolutionized 

The  rate  at  which  mobile  technology  is  being  adopted  by 
children  is  outstanding  [10].  The  use  of  mobile  phones  has 
totally 
interpersonal 
communications  between  children.  It  has  also  blurred  the 
boundaries  between  private  and  public 
scenarios  of 
communication  particularly  when  combined  with  social 
networking  forums  on  the  internet  [11].  The  multitude  of 
possible channels of social interaction are available to anyone 
with  a  mobile  phone  introducing  an  element  of  risk  that 
accompanies  that  first  phone  bought  by  a  parent  for  the 
youngest member of the family. The unprecedented uptake of 
mobile phones by children has severely increased the potential 
for  security  compromise  of  a  child’s  safety  and  well-being 
[12].  Although  the  provision  of  technology  to  children  by 
parents  is  for  the  advantages  of  instant  communication,  the 
uninformed  parent  is  missing  a  crucial  factor:  the  largely 
unregulated  environment  that  the  cell  phone  provides  access 
to  ̶  the internet. 

B.  Increasing presence of applications providing unregulated, 

uncensored content 
Social  networking  sites  offering  real-time  interaction  are 
predominately  uncensored  and  unregulated.  Some  social 
networking  forums  openly  declare  that  they  are  not  content 
providers  but  rather  service  providers  [13],  equating  their 
presence to that of a Post-Office that does not inspect content 
but rather facilitates the movement of messages. The multitude 
of  children  using  Mixit  [14]  and  other  social  networking 
applications  do  so  unsupervised  due  to  the  method  of  access 
afforded  by  mobile  telephony  and  without  monitoring  by  the 
channel  provider.  They  are,  therefore,  left  unscrupulously 
vulnerable to cyber-bullying and other threats.  

Local 

research 

the  problem  of  cyber-bullying 
facilitated  by  mobile  technology  will  yield  relevant  and 
effective solutions for the children of South Africa.  

into 

The existence of research into the problem  area of cyber-
bullying via mobile phones gives rise to the next point on the 
importance of risk reduction: limited research. 

C.  Limited research on the problem 

Although  the  threat  of  cyber-bullying  has  received  much 
attention  recently  as  a  result  of  unfortunate 
incidents 
culminating in detrimental consequences, such as the suicide of 
children  [14],  the  focus  still  appears  to  be  of  a  generalized 
nature  with  a  holistic  approach 
it  constitutes 
particularly  in  South  Africa.  What  is  lacking  is  definitive 
research into the risk that the local population is facing through 

to  what 

the  use  of  the  predominant  means  of  communication,  i.e. 
mobile  technology.  Research  is  needed  to  feed  real-life  data 
from  local  sources  into  the  design  and  development  of  a 
solution that can work for the local demographic. 

The  existence  of  generic  solutions  versus  demographic 
specific solutions gives rise to the next point on risk reduction: 
there  is  no  solution  that  caters  specifically  to  the  local 
demographic. 

D.  No solution that caters for the local demographic 

to 

Solutions 

the  problem  of  cyber-bullying  can  be 
addressed  from  two  different  perspectives,  i.e.  education  and 
technology. While there are elements of a solution, educational 
or  technological,  that  may  be  common  and  applicable  across 
population groups there is a need to apply specific techniques 
that allow for the risk profile of the victim to be factored into 
the solution considering age and socio-economic background. 
The  risk  profile  may  reveal  a  different  level  or  manner  of 
technological  usage;  may  have  a  different  understanding  of 
what  constitutes  risk;  have  a  different  or  no  supporting 
structure and may perceive and react differently to an attack. A 
solution that considers the specific demographic with specific 
risk profile analysis will not only be more effective but also be 
accepted due to its consideration for the intended audience. The 
next section explores the proposal.  

IV.  THE PROPOSAL 

The  proposed  solution  will  enable  a  risk  determination  to 
be  made  based  on  the  specific  risk  profile  of  the  individual 
user. The resultant output of the risk determination would be an 
explicit policy governing what the user is exposed to during an 
operation  of  communication.  A  neural  network  application 
resident  on  the  mobile  phone  unit  will  enable  inputs  to  be 
accepted for deliberations on ultimate actions to be taken. The 
learning  algorithm  for  the  neural  network  will  be  supervised. 
Input patterns and outputs are depicted in Figure 4 and Figure 
5.  A  fundamental  requirement  of  the  solution  is  to  make  the 
operation  as  seamless  and  unobtrusive  as  possible.  The 
objective  is  to  protect  the  end  user  and  prevent  a  situation 
whereby  an  alternative  unprotected  cellular  phone  is  used  to 
bypass  protective  mechanisms.  The  proposed  method  of 
protection  will  have  key  elements  fed  into  it  that  has  as  its 
source inputs from the very audience that it is intended for, the 
children. This approach will ensure that the necessary variables 
and  member  functions  we  define  as  well  as  rules  that  will 
operate  on  the  variables  are  relevant  and  provide  the  most 
effective result possible.  

The  solution  will  cater  for  all  eventualities  that  arise  as  a 
result  of  online  interaction,  stemming  from  texting,  instant 
messaging  and  social  networking  interaction,  such  as  sources 
of  communication 
responses, 
individuals  involved,  message  content  and  evaluation  of 
historical  message  content.  Illustrated  below,  Figure  2 
represents a schematic of the model to be implemented. 

requests,  communication 

 

Figure 2 –  Risk Model 

Inputs to the system are described as follows:  
Input  1  –  A  categorization  of  the  state  of  security  of  an 

individual based on age is depicted below: 

Grade 4 – The age of the user is less than 8. 
Grade 3 – The age of the user is 8 to 12. 
Grade 2 – The age of the user is 13 to 16. 
Grade 1 – The age of the user is 17 to 18. 
Input 2 – A categorization of online usage as a function of 
time spent online is described in the following sets: Uselist 1, 
Uselist  2,  Uselist  3.  These  sets  factor 
the  risk 
determination  process  in  order  to  impose  or  relax  applied 
policy according to certain conditions. 

into 

Uselist 1 – Online communication is excessive with 8 hours 

or more per week. 

Uselist  2  -  Online  communication  is  moderate  with  less 

than 8 hours per week. 

Uselist 3 - Online communication is low with less than 2 

hours per week. 

Input 3 – A categorization of the types of online access and 
associated  risks  are  depicted  in  the  sets  Category1  and 
Category 2. 

Category  1  –  Online  activity 

that  enables  direct 
communication  such  as  texting,  instant  messaging  and  social 
networking.  This  form  of  interaction  results  in  the  most 
potential for harm. 

Category 2 – Online activity that facilitates general access 
to information, no specific risk is associated with this form of 
access to users aged 16 and older. 

Classes of risk output are defined as follows in Figure 3: 

Figure 3 – Classes of Output 

The 24 inference rules that operate on the inputs described 

above are illustrated in Figure 4 and Figure 5. 

 

Figure 4 – Inference rules for category 1 with risk outputs 

indicated for data provided for input 2 and input 3. 

 

 

Category 2

and

Grade 1

Category 2

and

Grade 1

Category 2

and

Grade 1

Category 2

and

Grade 2

and

and

and

and

Userlist1

Userlist2

Userlist3

Userlist1

Category 2

and

Grade 2

and

Userlist2

Category 2

and

Grade 2

and

Userlist3

Category 2

and

Grade 3

and

Userlist1

Category 2

and

Grade 3

and

Userlist2

Category 2

Category 2

Category 2

Category 2

and

and

and

and

Grade 3

Grade 4

Grade 4

Grade 4

and

and

and

and

Userlist3

Userlist1

Userlist2

Userlist3

=

=

=

=

=

=

=

=

=

=

=

=

Moderate Risk

Negligible Risk

Negligible Risk

High Risk

Moderate Risk

Negligible Risk

Unacceptably 

High Risk

High Risk

High Risk

Unacceptably 

High Risk

High Risk

High Risk

 

Figure 5 – Inference rules for category 2 with risk outputs 

indicated for data provided for input 2 and input 3 

 
A  further  input  to  personalize  the  risk  profile  of  the  user 
and aid in the risk determination process will consider personal 
experiences  of  users  gauging  in  the  different  types  of  online 
interaction. 

V.  CONCLUSION 

In this paper we have identified and discussed the problem 
of  inadequate  controls  with  reference  to  the  protection  of 
children  from  cyber-bullying  via  the  cell  phone.  We  have 
further introduced the concept of dynamic problem resolution 
based on a proposed plan of a neural net system to dynamically 
identify a threat based on the risk profile of the individual user 
in  order  to  resolve  conflict  situations  where  dangers  are 

identified. The proposal in this paper is directed at protection to 
be implemented on the predominant technology in use, the cell 
phone.  Further  research  should  be  considered  to  explore 
additional  threat  vectors  to  the  security  of  users  of  mobile 
technologies. 

 

REFERENCES 

[1]  Great  Britain:  Parliament:  House  of  Commons:  Welsh  Affairs 
Committee,  House  of  Commons,  Digital  inclusion  in  WalesL  thirteen 
report of session 2008-2009, report, pg 135. 

[2]  Samuel  C.  McQuade,  James  P.Colt,  Nancy  B.B.  Meyer,  “Cyber-

bullying: protecting kids and adults from online bullies”, 2009, pg 92. 

[3]  Sameer  Hinduja,  Justim  W.Patchin,  “Bullying  beyond  the  schoolyard: 

[4]  MTN, 

preventing and responding to cyberbullying”, 2009, pg 5.. 
Control”, 

2008, 
http://www.mtn.co.za/MTNServices/MTNPersonalSafety/Pages/MTNPa
rentalControl.aspx  

Parental 

“MTN 

[5]  South  African  Police  Service,  “Protection  of  Children  Against  Cyber 
Crime 
2010, 
http://www.saps.org.za/dynamicModules/internetsite/newsBuild.asp?my
URL=959 

Priority”, 

Govt 

A 

[6]  Peter  Sloot,  “Computational 
conference, Part4”, 2003, pg 610. 

science—ICCS  2003 

international 

[7]  Terri Bregeut, “Frequently asked questions about cyberbullying”, 2007, 

pg 20. 

[8]  Nancy E.Willard, “Cyberbullying and Cyber threats – Responding to the 
challenge  of  online  social  aggression,  threats,  and  distress”,  2007,  pg 
281. 

[9]  Amanda  Lenhart,  “Teens,Cellphone  and  Texting”,  “Text  Messaging 
2010, 

Becomes 
http://pewresearch.org/pubs/1572/teens-cell-phones-text-messages 

Communication”, 

Centerpiece 

[10]  Susan  Brookes-Young,  “Teaching  With  the  Tools  Kids  Really  Use 

Learning With Web and Mobile”, 2010, pg 15. 

[11]  Serap  Kurbanoglu,  Umut  Al,  Phyllis  Lepon-Erdogan,  Yasar  Tonta, 
Nazan  Ucak,  “Technological  Convergence  and  Social  Networks  in 
Information Management”, 2010, pg v. 

[12]  Norton  Symmantec,  “Cyber  bullying-Anti  social  behaviour  online”, 

March30,2007,http://us.norton.com/library/familyresource/article.jsp?ai
d=pr_cyberbully 

[13]  Mixit,  “Content  and  use  policy,  guiudelines  and  position  statement”, 

2011, http://www.mixit.com/content.ap/en/legal_content 

[14]  Mixit, “Mobile Chat”, 2011, http://www.mixit.com 

 

 

