Online Social Networks: Enhancing user trust through 

effective controls and identity management 

Ryan Galpin 

Stephen V. Flowerday 

Department of Information Systems 

University of Fort Hare 
East London, South Africa 

rwgalpin@gmail.com 

Abstract - Online social networking is one of the largest Internet 
activities, with almost one third of all daily Internet users visiting 
these  websites.    Characteristics  of  this  environment  are  issues 
relating to trust, user privacy and anonymity.  Service providers 
are  focused  primarily  on  acquiring  users  and  little  attention  is 
given to the effective management of these users within the social 
networking environment.  In order to examine this problem, user 
trust and its enhancement is discussed.  An evaluation of current 
identity  management  processes  and  effective  controls 
is 
undertaken,  in  order  to  understand  the  current  environment.  
Lastly,  by  means  of  a  detailed  experiment  focusing  on  the  two 
main  online  social  networking  providers,  Facebook  and 
MySpace,  controls  and  identity  management  processes  were 
assessed  for  vulnerabilities.    The  findings  of  this  experiment, 
together  with  the  current  environment  of  controls  and  identity 
management practices, form the proposed set of controls.  These 
controls  are  aimed  at  increasing  trust  and  privacy  through  the 
effective 
identity 
management processes.   

these  controls  and 

implementation  of 

 

Keywords: online social networking, trust, privacy, identity 

management, Facebook, MySpace 

I. 

 INTRODUCTION 

Online  social  networks  are  currently  one  of  the  most 
popular Internet activities, recently even eclipsing email usage.  
More than two-thirds of the global on-line population visit and 
participate  in  social  networks,  confirming  its  worldwide 
popularity [1].  Online social networking websites leading this 
trend  are  Facebook  and  MySpace,  with  Facebook  presently 
leading the competitors with impressive usage statistics.  The 
percentage  of worldwide  Internet  users  that  visit  Facebook  is 
reported to be a monthly average of 32% [2].  That amounts to 
almost  one  third  of  all  Internet  users  at  a  given  point.    In 
comparison, MySpace attracts only a  monthly average of 3% 
[3].    Based  on  these  statistics,  online  social  networking  is 
without question, a global phenomenon.  Together with such a 
fast  spreading  activity,  various  concerns  and  risks  become 
evident.  The establishment of trust and the protection of users 
becomes  an  ongoing  challenge  within  the  online  social 
networking environment, with the threat of misuse and privacy 
intrusions  by  malicious  users  illustrating  this  challenge.    The 
identities  encountered  within  these  online  environments  are 
known  as  Virtual  Persons.    This  Virtual  Person  serves  as  a 
mask  for  the  real  underlying  identity,  known  as  the  subject.  
This  subject  can  be  real  or  fabricated,  and  can  have  multiple 
masks through which they interact [4].  Due to this degree of 

 
 

Department of Information Systems 

University of Fort Hare 
East London, South Africa 

sflowerday@ufh.ac.za

anonymity,  online  social  network  providers  are  tasked  with 
maintaining  a  connection  between  the  multiple  users  in  the 
environment  and  the  true  identity  of  the  individual  they 
represent.  The ability to accurately authenticate these identities 
requires a form of control that can map multiple users to their 
singular  entity.    The  introduction  of  Identity  Management 
(IDM)  procedures  and  systems  to  the  online  environment 
serves as this control.  In order for a trusting relationship to be 
formed  between  the  users  and  the  social  networking  service 
providers,  controls  and  authentication  procedures  must  be 
implemented to limit the occurrence of these malicious attacks.  
Currently, these controls are weak and the IDM procedures in 
place to protect users are inconclusive [5].  As a result of this 
inability  of  online  social  network  providers  to  manage 
identities within this environment, users develop a lack of trust 
for the system and the services it provides.   

A  more  serious  concern  for  social  networking  service 
providers  is  that  they  are  continually  finding  themselves  as 
targeted  platforms  from  which  sexual  offenders  and  various 
other  individuals,  intending  to  defame  or  harm  users,  launch 
their attacks.  Numerous news and web articles highlight this 
problem and report on the thousands of offensive users being 
identified and removed yearly [30] [8] [10].  The personal risk 
associated  with  these  types  of  attacks  includes  kidnappings, 
child molestation, sexual abuse, defamation and other forms of 
harassment and indecency [31].  In June 2008, a middle aged 
woman was charged with using MySpace to ‘cyber bully’ a 13 
year-old girl who later, as a result of the abuse, took her own 
life.  The woman allegedly posed online as a teenage boy and 
used this identity to interact with the girl [10].   

It  is  therefore  apparent  that  misrepresentation  of  identity 
within  the  social  network  environment  is  a  serious  concern.  
Trusting relationships are formed all too easily, resulting in the 
inexperienced or adolescent users falling prey to those wishing 
to inflict harm.   

Due  to  these  concerns  and  identified  risks,  the  primary 
objective of this paper is to investigate how user trust can be 
enhanced through the implementation of effective controls and 
IDM practices.  Elements that contribute to user trust within the 
online  social  networking  context  are  also  explored,  together 
with an assessment of current IDM practices evident within the 
two  main  social  network  providers,  Facebook  and  MySpace.  
The  remainder  of  this  paper  comprises  of  the  following 
sections.    Section  2  provides  an  overview  of  online  social 

networks,  and  introduces  the  vulnerabilities  and  concerns 
associated  with  using  the  service.    Section  3  defines  the 
concept of trust and further explores the challenge arising when 
attempting  to  establish  a  trusting  relationship  between  users 
and service providers.  Section 4 provides an overview of the 
current forms of IDM, and defines their application to online 
social networking.  Due to the nature of information that can be 
disclosed  through  online  social  networks,  trust  and  the 
preservation of the trusting relationship is important.  Section 5 
introduces  an  experiment  used  to  evaluate  online  social 
network  providers’  controls  and  practices,  resulting  in  the 
identification of vulnerabilities.  Finally, section 7 presents the 
set  of  controls  recommended  to  ensure  user  security  and 
enhanced  levels  of  trust  if  implemented  by  online  social 
networking service providers. 

II.  ONLINE SOCIAL NETWORKING VULNERABILITIES 
In order to understand the vulnerable areas of online social 
networks, the security and privacy risks associated with using 
the  social  networking  services  will  be  presented.    These  will 
highlight the vulnerable areas evident within the online social 
networking environment. 
A.  Online Social Networks(OSN) 

A typical social network provider offers several basic core 
features  for  users.    The  most  basic  of  these  features  is  the 
ability to create and share a personal profile.  This profile page 
typically 
includes  a  photograph,  some  basic  personal 
information (such as name, age, gender, and location) and other 
areas  of  interest.    OSN  enables  users  to  interact  and  develop 
friendships with users anywhere in the world.  
B.  Vulnerabilities - Security and Privacy Risks 

OSN  are  faced  with  two  key  security  risks  which  can 
directly  affect  users  and  their  interactions  with  the  service 
providers.    The  first  evident  risk  is  that  social  network 
providers are unable to provide effective user authentication in 
assisting users to identify with whom they are interacting with 
[6] [7].  This is a result of the ease with which an individual 
can create a profile.  No concrete identifiers are needed, and an 
email address is anonymous and easily created.  Identity theft, 
impersonation  and  fictitious  profile  fabrication  are  common 
occurrences,  as  the  natures  of  most  online  interactions  are 
anonymous and untraceable.  Due to this lack of authentication 
when  profiles  are  created,  imposter  profiles  can  easily  be 
developed  to  assume  the  identity  of  an  individual.    Figure  1 
shows  this  complex  nature  of  online  interactions  with  an 
example of the partial identities of an individual. 

An  individual  would  typically  appear  under  many  partial 
identities within the real world, such as work, leisure and other 
dimensions  of  social  interactions.    Each  of  these  identities 
exhibits characteristics about the individual, necessary for the 
chosen  situation  and  also  provides  positive  authentication  of 
the individual.  In an online encounter however, none of these 
characteristics  can  be  authenticated,  due  to  the  anonymous 
nature of such interactions.  To mitigate the user authentication 
shortfall, social networking providers suggest users spend time 
browsing the unknown friend requestor’s friend list.  If other 
common ‘friends’ and contacts are identified, a certain level of 
trust can be implied [9].  

 

Figure 1.   Partial Identities of John [9] 

Currently,  most  OSN  provide  users  with  basic  privacy 
functionality.  This is designed to protect users from unwanted 
visitors  to  their  profile  page,  with  only  accepted  friends  and 
network  members  able  to  view  a  user’s  complete  profile.  
However,  in order  for  this  functionality  to be  effective,  users 
should  to  be  extremely  selective  when  adding  other  users  to 
their personal network or ‘groups’.  If all friend invitations are 
accepted without any scrutiny, there remains a possibility that 
one or more of these users may be sinister. 

Based upon the security and privacy risks identified, online 
social  networking  users  are  vulnerable  due  to  ineffective 
controls  and  IDM  processes  [5].    A  basic  understanding  of 
current IDM processes is needed to recognize that effectiveness 
is lacking with current application of these processes.  This will 
now be discussed. 

III. 

INCREASING USER TRUST: THE CHALLENGE  

Trust forms one of the most highly regarded human values 
and  contributes  to  the  basic  pre-conditions  when  users  adopt 
electronic  based  interactions  [11].    The  principles  of  trust 
evident in user relationships within online social networks must 
be  explored  to  understand  and  define  the  expectations  and 
requirements of online users within this online environment. 

A.  Trust and Online Social Networking 

Trust can be defined as the willingness of an individual to 
be vulnerable to the actions of another individual, based on the 
expectation that the other will perform a particular action [12].  
This acceptance of vulnerability and risk is irrespective of the 
ability  to  monitor  or  control  the  behaviour  exhibited  by  the 
other  party  involved  [13].    Another  view  defines  trust  as  a 
mental  phenomenon  that  occurs  within  social  contexts  and 
applies to both online and offline environments.  Evidence that 
trust  depends  on  previous  experiences  and  not  only  on  one-
time interactions adds to the social context that trust develops 
gradually through interactions [14].   

Within  online  social  networking,  trust  and  levels  of 
trustworthiness  within  these  websites  can  only  be  inferred 
based on the information available to users.  It is evident that 
information influences people’s judgements about others [14].  

After  users  establish  a  membership  and  experience  the  social 
networking  site  as  valuable,  their  usage  of  the  site  will 
increase.    Each  user  will  then  have  to  decide  if  the  posted 
information  experienced  on  the  social  network  is  an  honest 
reflection of reality.  Before the evaluation of this information 
takes  place,  a  user’s  perception  of 
the  safety  and 
trustworthiness  of  these  systems  becomes  influential.    The 
assessment of an individual’s trustworthiness is influenced by 
trust in the system and its users [11].  Online social networks 
provide individuals with an opportunity not experienced in real 
life  situations.    This  opportunity  is  to  view  and  analyse  an 
individual’s  complete  list  of  social  references,  which  greatly 
influences levels of trustworthiness.   

B.  Trust and Uncertainty Reduction Theory 

When undertaking an online social networking experience, 
individuals  are  faced  with  varying  levels  of  uncertainty 
regarding the encounter.  This is heightened when interacting 
during the introductory phase with unknown individuals.  The 
unpredictable nature of these interactions adds to the feeling of 
uncertainty [15].  Trust and trustworthiness becomes a result of 
an  individual’s  ability  to  reduce  uncertainty  by  increasing  an 
individual’s behavioural predictability [16].  

increasing 

this  uncertainty  and 

Uncertainty Reduction Theory is the discipline that defines 
the influence of uncertainty during a relationship, as well as a 
means  of  reducing 
the 
predictability of interacting individuals [17].  This is achieved 
by engaging in various steps and checkpoints to decide whether 
the  individual  is  liked  or  disliked.    In  addition  to  this, 
communication  and 
information  about 
individuals contributes to a decrease in uncertainty [18].  This 
theory applies well to the context of online social networking 
as  all  interactions  take  place  between  individuals.    Several 
sources discuss the relationships between individuals, and the 
manner in which behaviour can contribute to trust and a lesser 
degree of uncertainty [15] [18] [17] [13].   

the  exchange  of 

future interaction plans. They may also discuss ways to allow 
the relationship to grow and continue.  
C.  Trust and controls 

It  is  evident  that  trust  and  levels  of  trustworthiness  are 
characterized by relationships between individuals.  However, 
trust must also be placed in the system.  Uncertainty is present 
in  both  elements  of  the  encounter,  so  a  way  of  reducing  this 
uncertainty  and  increasing  user  confidence  is  needed.    The 
level of trust and the presence and adequacy of controls are the 
two main factors affecting user confidence.  This is depicted in 
Figure  3.    The  higher  the  degree  of  trust  displayed  between 
individuals, the less need to implement stringent controls.  This 
can be reversed if a low degree of trust is evident, where more 
controls are then needed to establish confidence. 

A

C

Trust

Controls

E 

F 

B 

D

Confidence

 

Figure 3.   The Relationship between Trust, Controls and Confidence [18] 

 

The Risk Appetite Line (E-F) is dependent on the levels of 
trust between two individuals.  If there is a high degree of trust 
evident, the focus of the line will be more on the trust area and 
less  on  the  control  area.    If  there  is  a  low  degree  of  trust 
between the two parties, the focus will be more on controls and 
less on trust, resulting in the line being directed closer to the 
right.  It is desirable that a balance is reached; it would be rare 
to  have  complete  trust  and  no  controls,  or  the  opposite, 
complete controls and no trust.  

TABLE I.  

TRUST AND CONTROL DIAGRAM NARRATIVE 

Interactions between unknown individuals typically follow 
three stages [19].  Interaction may also terminate at the end of 
the entry phase, as continuing through the three stages is at the 
discretion of both individuals.  Figure 2 illustrates these stages. 

  

Figure 2.   Three Stages Of Interaction (Own Compilation) 

 

During  the  Entry  Stage,  information  of  a  demographic 
nature is generally discussed.  This includes name, gender and 
age, economic and social status.  Interactions within this entry 
stage  are  controlled  by  societal  communication  rules  and 
norms.  When individuals begin to share information regarding 
attitudes,  values  and  more  personal  data  such  as  likes  and 
dislikes, they have entered into the Personal Stage.  During this 
stage,  individuals  feel  less  inhibited  by  rules  and  norms  and 
have a tendency to communicate more freely with each other.  
Next is the Exit Stage.  During this stage, individuals decide on 

 

While  the  relationship  described  refers  to  organizational 
confidence,  the  concept  of  how  trust  and  controls  influence 
confidence  can  be  easily  applied  to  the  OSN  context.    The 
interacting individuals are replaced by the online user and the 
combination  of  social  networking  service  provider  and 
application.  Each user has their own Risk Appetite line, which 
reflects  their  level  of  trust  offered,  based  on  the  controls 
present in the environment.  This results in an increased level 
of confidence and trust for the user.  

In  order  to  reduce  uncertainty  and  increase  trust,  the 
introduction  of  an  effective  system  of  controls  can  overcome 
this  challenge.    Systems  of  controls  become  applicable  in  an 
OSN  environment  for  several  reasons.    As  controls  are  a 
planned measure or countermeasure designed to mitigate a risk, 
their  primary  application  is  that  of  protecting  users  and  their 
information  from  individuals  desiring  to  harm  them  [20].  
These controls are often combinations of people, processes and 

tools put in place to prevent, detect or correct issues caused by 
unwanted events.  Their desired outcome is to create a carefully 
designed  control  framework  that  weaves  the  various  types  of 
controls together and protects the organization from risks [16].  
These controls are categorized according to the function they 
perform,  with 
functional  categories  being 
Preventative, Detective and Corrective as seen in figure 4 [20].   
A comprehensive set of controls must be designed around 
these  core  functional  categories  in  order  to  be  effective  and 
reduce  the  level  of  uncertainty  existing  between  individuals.  
Not only is the level of trust between individuals important, but 
so too is the relationship between users and the system.   

the  main 

experienced, with users no longer re-prompted for login details 
across  applications  and  services.    This  is  only  possible  if  the 
service provider is partnered to the SSO provider [6]. 

Identity Management Sytems (IMS) 

2) 
An  IMS  refers  to  an  information  system  or  to  a  set  of 
technologies  that  can  be  used  to  support  the  management  of 
identities  [22].    IMS  align  to  three  main  categorizations,  as 
shown in figure 5. 

It  is  apparent  from  the  categorization  provided  [22],  that 
social networking IMS are typically of type 1.  Social network 
providers  such  as  Facebook  and  MySpace  administer  the 
creation and management of all profile creation and changes, as 
well  as  the  authentication  and  authorization  of  these  profiles 
during  everyday  use  of  the  service.    For  these  very  reasons, 
they exhibit the key characteristics of type 1 IMS. 

 

Figure 4.   Summary of Three Control Theory Perspectives (own compilation) 
Controls  implemented  within  these  social  networking 
applications can limit uncertainty and help develop confidence 
and trust in the system.  The following section will discuss the 
other element needed to enhance the relationship between users 
and the system, namely the IDM practices and processes. 

IV. 

IDENTITY MANAGEMENT WITHIN ONLINE SOCIAL 

NETWORKS 

IDM  is  defined  as  the  management  of  identification, 
authentication and authorization information, as well as the use 
of  this  information  to  authenticate  and  properly  authorize 
principals in a computer network or distributed system, such as 
the Internet [21].   

The common attribute of IDM practices within the current 
online environment is the “one to many” relationship between 
user and service provider.  These IDM practices aim to manage 
one  user  across  many  service  providers.    However,  the  more 
challenging aspect of IDM is the implementation of the process 
within  these  service  providers.    Users  are  able  to  create 
multiple user profiles or accounts that can be accessed within 
one  online  service.    Systems  and  processes  need  to  be 
implemented  that  can  manage  these  users  and  achieve  a 
satisfactory  level  of  user-to-profile  linking.    Current  IDM 
practices  will  now  be  briefly  discussed.    These  practices 
include the core concepts of Single Sign-On (SSO) and Identity 
Management  Systems  (IMS).  Current  Identity  Management 
Models (IMD) will now be discussed. 
A.  Current IDM Practices 

Presently, formal IDM is a practice exhibited at corporate 
level,  with  many  large  software  vendors  providing  IDM 
solutions.  These solutions are primarily focused on managing 
employees  across  internal  boundaries.    The  core  concepts  of 
these IDM solutions are: 

 1)  Single Sign-on 
Single sign-on is the ability of a user to create a single set 
of  login  details,  which  they  can  share  and  gain  access  to 
numerous  systems  or  networks. 
  Efficiency  gains  are 

 

Figure 5.   IMS Classification Summary (own compilation) 

The comparison in figure 4 shows the attributes of the three 
IMS types.  Based on the comprehensiveness of type 1 IMS, 
this  reiterates  the  use  of  these  systems  within  online  social 
networking  services.    Providers  have  developed  a  highly 
intricate  network  of  relationships  between  users  worldwide.  
Such services require most of the tabled attributes in order to 
perform effectively, from both user and provider’s perspective.   

 

Figure 6.   Identity Management Systems Summary (own compilation) 

B.  Identity Management Models (IDMM) 

The  IDMM  to  be  discussed  are  the  most  commonly 
exhibited  models  identified  within  organizations  and  service 
providers  worldwide.    At  the  conclusion  of  this  section,  the 
various models will be compared and discussed. 

Currently, the Isolated User Identity Model (ISUIM) is the 
most common IDM model used.  Service providers act as both 
credential provider and identifier provider to their users. They 
control  the  service  domain  and  allocate  identifiers  to  users.  
This  model  requires  that  each  user  possess  an  identifier  for 
access to each isolated service [23].  This model  is attractive 
for service providers, due to its ease of management.  This is 

characterized by the simple process whereby a single user gets 
assigned  a  single  set  of  login  credentials.    However,  as 
demands increase throughout the online environment, users are 
being overloaded with identifiers and credentials that they need 
to remember and manage.  The management of these multiple 
credential sets almost becomes an impossible task [24]. 

Typically,  there  is  only  one  identifier  and  credential  provider 
which is responsible for the generation of these credentials, as 
well as the authentication when interacting with the user [25]. 

This model is very similar to the FUIM, where the user can 
access  all  service  providers  with  the  use  of  a  single  set  of 
credentials.    The  difference  arises  in  the  mapping  process 
needed for the federated model to be effective.  Instead of each 
service provider still maintaining their own unique credentials 
per user, the same credentials set will now be accepted by any 
other provider.   

 

Figure 7.   Isolated User Identity Model (ISUIM) [23] 

The  Federated  User  Identity  Model  (FUIM)  attempts  to 
address inefficiencies found within ISUIM.  Identity federation 
is a set of agreements, standards and technologies that enable a 
group  of  service  providers  to  recognise  user  identifiers  from 
other service providers within a federated domain.   

In  federated  identity  domains,  agreements  are  established 
between  SPs  so  that  identities  from  different  SP  domains  are 
recognised  across  all  domains.    This  incorporates  a  mapping 
process to be performed by each service provider, which stores 
the user and credential combinations for later evaluation [23]. 

 

Figure 8.   Federated User Identity Model (FUIM) [23] 

The  Common  User  Identity  Model  (CUIM)  is  relatively 
simple in operation.  Here, a single authority or entity acts as 
the exclusive user credentials provider for all service providers.  
A user can then access all service providers by using the same 
set of credentials.   

Figure 9.   Common User Identity Model (CUIM) [23] 

The  Single  Sign-On  Identity  Model  (SSOIM)  allows  the 
user to be authenticated by one service provider and in turn, to 
be  considered  authenticated  across  several  other  service 
providers  as  well,  by  using  the  same  set  of  credentials.  

 

 

Figure 10.  Single Sign-On Identity Model (SSOIM) [23] 

identity  management  models  evident 

Figure 11 below depicts the comparison between the four 
main 
throughout 
organizations  and  service  providers  worldwide.    All  four 
models are characterized by the same service provider role of 
credentials and identifiers provider.  However, only the isolated 
and  federated models  have  locally  generated  user  credentials.  
What this means is that service providers have control over the 
service  domain  and  the  allocation  of  identifiers  to  users.  
Common  and  single  sign-on  have  their  user  credentials 
generated by an independent third party.  The isolated model is 
primarily  used  for  a  single  domain  environment,  where  users 
will operate within the service provider’s domain exclusively.  
This can prove problematic for the user, as the management of 
multiple username-password credential sets is a tedious task. 

 

Figure 11.  Identity Management Model Summary (own compilation) 
OSN  are  domains  where  anonymity  is  easily  created  and 
ensured.    The  information  needed  to  create  a  new  profile  is 
general and non descriptive [26].  The models  mentioned are 
all effective in their designated environments, but fall short of 
encapsulating the world of social networking. 
C.  Current IDM evidence within Online Social Networks 

In  mid  2008,  Facebook  developers  announced  a  new 
service  to  their  growing  platform  that  was  an  attempt  at  a 
complete  IDM  solution  for  all  Facebook  users.    This  was 
entitled  Facebook  Connect,  and  was  officially  launched  in 
December  2008  [27].    Some  key  features  are  (1)  Trusted 
Authentication, which enables users to connect their Facebook 
account with any partner website using a trusted authentication 

method and (2) Real Identity, which enables users to represent 
themselves  with  their  real  names  and  identities  as  used  in 
Facebook while Internet browsing. 

The IDM link achieved by Facebook Connect is that of an 
SSO  identity  model  wherein  Facebook  users  may  use  their 
original  Facebook  login  credentials  to  access  the  partner 
websites  affiliated  with  the  Connect  service.    In  response, 
MySpace  announced  a  very  similar  service  in  2008  entitled 
MySpace Data Availability.  This additional service displayed 
similar characteristics to Facebook Connect, including enabling 
users  to  have  their  MySpace  profiles  follow  them  around  as 
they conduct their Internet browsing [28].   

As  mentioned  earlier,  these  forms  of  IDMM  are  effective 
for environments where the identity is verified or where there 
is no real threat should the user not be who they claim to be.  
However, within the OSN context, the application of this SSO 
model attracts the same shortfalls when required to effectively 
manage  identities.    Facebook  Connect  and  MySpace  Data 
Availability  are  unable  to  accurately  authenticate  the  user’s 
profile  and  are  only  providing  a  further  service  that  extracts 
user Internet activity.  The underlying IDM problems of user 
anonymity and the ability to create multiple profiles still exists.   

V.  EVALUATING CURRENT CONTROLS 

In order to test the various controls and processes presented 
by  these  OSN  service  providers  to  their  users,  a  detailed 
experiment  was  designed  and  conducted  for  analysis.    Each 
area was identified due to the contribution to the problem area, 
and was assessed for possible vulnerabilities. 
A.  Profile Creation and Interactions 

The core feature behind the design of the experiment was 
creating  a  number  of  fictitious  user  profiles,  each  with  a 
specific character focus and created by the researcher.  These 
were  duplicated  across  both  MySpace  and  Facebook  service 
providers.    These  profiles  were  used  to  conduct  the  daily 
activities of the average social networking user.  Each profile 
had an associated character type linked to it, and this was the 
style and attitude of interaction used during the experiment.  

 

TABLE II.  

SUMMARY OF EXPERIMENT ASSESSMENT AREAS 

 

Assessment Area 

 
 

Age Controls 

 
 

Privacy Controls 

 

Profile Controls 

 

Identity 

Management – 
Service Provider 

Administrator 
Effectiveness 

 
 

Assessment Items 

  Age Verification during profile creation 
  Ability to search users by age 
  Ability to send underage users friend requests 
  Ability for underage users to interact with adults 
  Search groups where teen activity would be high 
  Default setting when creating a profile 
  Ease of use – changing of privacy settings 
  Public versus Private profile settings 
  Management of friends 
  Blocking/Reporting of unwanted users 
  Multiple profiles created by single user 
  Multiple profiles share same password 
  Identity Management 
  All created profiles linked to a blocked user 
  Treatment of reported/blocked users 
  Feedback from reporting/blocking requests 

B.  Key Assessment Areas 

All areas are closely linked to user trust of the system and 
fellow  users,  as  well  as  any  IDM  practices  currently  being 
employed  in  an  OSN  environment.    These  assessment  areas 
were used to guide the experiment as well as form the primary 
focus areas of the proposed artefact. 
C.  Experiment Findings 

The  key  findings  from  the  experiment  displayed  evidence 
of  shortcomings  in  several  areas  of  assessment.    These 
findings are as follows, presented per assessment area: 
  Age Controls 

Through the analysis of the controls presented by both 
service  providers,  it  is  apparent  that  several  controls  exist 
and  are  effective,  but  the  controls  relating  directly  to  the 
individual  identities  and  the  management  thereof  are 
lacking and highly ineffective.  Both service providers have 
a minimum age for users to create a profile.  This minimum 
age  control  was  evaluated  and  found  to  restrict  any 
underage users from creating a profile, but when tried later 
with a different year of birth, the profiles were created.   

Similarly, age controls were not present in areas where 
teen and underage activity was common, allowing users of 
any age to interact and communicate with these users. 
  Privacy Controls 

Both  service  providers  presented  adequate  controls  to 
establish  user  trust  through  their  ability  to  protect  user 
privacy and manage profile privacy settings. 
  Profile Controls 

Both  service  providers  presented  effective  controls  for 
the management of friends, which include the friend invite 
functionality of searching and sending friend requests.   

The contrasts arose when investigating the reporting and 
blocking controls of unwanted contacts.  This functionality 
should  be  the  most  effective  as  this  is  the  only  means 
through  which  a  user  can  remove  any  unwanted  contacts 
from  their  social  networking  environment.    Facebook 
exhibited the most effective controls in this area; however 
the reporting of users proved to be questionable. 

It is evident that these service providers have no IDM 
processes  within  this  area  to  ensure  that  users  are  always 
protected from unwanted contact.  Blocking controls must 
ensure no further contact is ever possible from that blocked 
individual, even if attempts are made to create new profiles 
to  continue  harassment.    User  trust  in  the  system  and  the 
service  providers  will  suffer  if  they  feel  they  are  not  in 
control  of  their  interactions  and  that  the  service  providers 
do not place their safety in high regard. 
 

Identity Management – Service Provider 
It is evident from the experiment in this area that there 
are  no  forms  of  IDM  processes  existing  within  the  OSN 
environment.  This conclusion excludes the formal profile 
creation  process  which  is  a  form  of  IDM  in  its  simplest 
application.  Findings in this area present a situation where 
service  providers  have  no  ability  to  manage  multiple 

profiles by single individuals.  This is further evident when 
blocking unwanted users.  Profiles created by blocked users 
remain active and able to contact complainants.   

Based  on  these  findings,  it  can  be  concluded  that 
effective  IDM  controls  and  processes  are  lacking  in  the 
OSN environment.  This directly affects user trust levels in 
the system, as blocked users may still make contact through 
other fake user profiles after the blocking has taken effect.   
  Administrator Effectiveness 

During  the  experiment,  the  effectiveness  of  service 
providers’  administrators  was  assessed  when  handling 
blocking  and  reporting  of  users.    This  included  the 
treatment of these users and also the feedback provided to 
users after performing one of these actions.   

It was evident that both service providers were effective 
in  the  blocking  of  users  and  immediately  removed  them 
from the complainant’s friend list.  However, as discussed 
earlier, the final result when assessing the effectiveness of 
administrators  when  blocking  users  was  ineffective.    This 
was due to the ability of these blocked users to create a new 
profile and perform the same harassing interactions.   

VI.  SOCIAL NETWORKING CONTROL SET 

Based on the findings gathered during the experiment, it 
was evident that several areas presented concerns for users 
These  concerns  were  as  a  result  of  no  apparent  controls 
present  to  prevent  and  discourage  certain  behaviour  from 
users.  It was also evident that where various controls were 
in place, the level of effectiveness was questionable.  The 
artefact presented is in the form of a set of recommended 
controls to be implemented by social networking providers 
to ensure effective IDM as a means to enhance user trust.  
The artefact will comprise of newly proposed controls, as 
well  as  any  existing  controls  proving  effective  in  their 
current  application.    Table  III  shows  a  summary  of  the 
Social Networking Control Set.   

The purpose of this set of controls is to increase the trust 
levels  of  users  through  the  implementation  of  effective 
controls.  It was established that if there are low levels of 
trust  experienced,  the  implementation  of  controls  will 
increase the level of user confidence, resulting in a higher 
degree of trust displayed.  Although no operational results 
are evident from the proposed artefact, implementation and 
the study thereof will form the basis of future research in 
this area. 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

Control Group 

Control Name 
  Email registration  

  Underage Communication 

Age Controls 

  Underage User Privacy 

  Group Age 

  User Search Age 

  Profile Privacy Settings 

  Friend Request 

  Messaging 

  User reporting and 

Blocking 

  User Verification 

  Profile Linking 

Privacy Controls 

 

 

 
 
 

 

Profile Controls 

 
 

Identity 

Management 

Controls 

TABLE III.  

SUMMARY OF SOCIAL NETWORKING CONTROL SET 

Control Description 

  Service providers must log all email addresses that fail the initial age verification 

control at profile creation.    

  To ensure effectiveness, email address and username and surname must be logged 

to prevent the same user with a new email address variation from registering. 

  If contact is attempted between an adult user and an underage user, the adult must 

input the younger user’s email address as confirmation.   

  All underage users must be protected by the service providers’ administrators by 

default, and cannot make changes to privacy settings.   

  Service providers and group creators must apply recommended age restrictions to 

Preventative 

these various groups.   

  No adults should be able to search or find groups relating to teen interests and likes.   
  Service providers must either remove ability to search for users by age completely 

Detective 
Preventative 

or make the youngest search age 18 year olds.   

  Service providers must exhibit strong controls that protect the users’ privacy and 

ensure users are protected by default. 

  Service providers must ensure that the controls in place to manage user profiles are 

  Adult users should not be able to send friend requests to underage users without 

  Messaging controls must be in place to ensure that only friends can send and receive 

effective and easy to use.   

email address as confirmation.   

messages between each other.  

  When a user requests to report another user, this must be enforced immediately. 
  Blocked users must not find complainant’s profile through a user search. 
  It is proposed that the blocked user’s name and profile details be flagged so that 

they cannot simply create a new profile with similar details. 

  Effective user verification process to be part of registration process.  Must include 

submission of government issued identification document or similar.   

  Documents to be submitted for profile activation; else a status must appear on 

profile as “unconfirmed”.  This acts as a warning that the identity of the profile is 
unconfirmed.   

  Service providers are encouraged to create automated processes that filter created 

profiles for various triggers. 

  These filters act as triggers for investigation.  Investigations could request identity 
verification or similar means to confirm the individual and remove profile alerts. 

Control 
Type 

Preventative 

Preventative 

Preventative 

 
 

 

Preventative 

 

Preventative 

Preventative 

 

Corrective 

 
 

Preventative 

Detective 

 

Corrective 

[14]  Shin,  D.  (2010).  The  effects  of  trust,  security  and  privacy  in  social 
networking:  A  security-based  approach  to  understand  the  pattern  of 
adoption. Interacting with Computers. Vol. 22, No. 5, pp. 428-438.  

[15]  Dwyer, C., Hiltz, S. and Passerini, K. (2007). Trust and privacy concern 
within social networking sites: a comparison of Facebook and MySpace. 
Proceedings  of  the  Thirteenth  Americas  Conference  on  Information 
Systems (2007). 

[16]  Ten Kate, S. (2009). Trustworthiness within Social Networking Sites: A 

study on the intersection of HCI and Sociology. 

[17]  Antheunis, M., Valkenburg, P. and Peter, J. (2009). Getting acquainted 
through  social  network  sites:  Testing  a  model  of  online  uncertainty 
reduction and social attraction. Computers in Human Behaviour. Vol. 26, 
pp. 100-109. 

[18]  Mayer, R., Schoorman, D. and Davis, J. (2007).  An integrative model of 
organizational trust: past, present, and future.  Academy of Management 
Review. Vol. 32, No. 2, pp. 344-354. 

[19]  Neuliep,  J.  and  Grohskopf,  E.  (2000).    Uncertainty  reduction  and 
communication satisfaction during initial interaction: An initial test and 
replication of a new axiom.  Communication Reports. Vol. 13, No. 2, pp. 
67-77. 

[20]  Flowerday,  S.,  and  von  Solms,  R.  (2006).  Trust:  an  Element  of 
Information  Security.  Presented  at 
IFIP/SEC  2006,  Karlstad, 
Sweden.  Published in S. Fischer-Hubner, K. Rannenberg, L. Yngstrom, 
S. Lindskog (Eds.). Security and Privacy in Dynamic Environments. 87-
98. IFIP. USA: Springer. 

[21]  Berger,  C.  and  Calabrese,  R.  (1975).  Some  explorations  in  initial 
interaction and beyond: Toward a developmental theory of interpersonal 
communication. Human Communication Research. Vol. 1, pp. 99-112. 

[22]  Giblin, C. and Hada, S. (2008). Towards separation of duties for services.  
from 

25  August, 

Retrieved 

2010, 

on 

IBM 
http://www.zurich.ibm.com 

Zurich. 

[23]  Oppliger, R. (2004). Microsoft .NET Passport and identity management. 

Information Security Technical Report. Vol. 9, No. 1, pp. 26-34. 

[24]  Fidis  WP  3.  (2005).  D3.1:  Structured  Overview  on  Prototypes  and 
Concepts  of  Identity  Management  Systems.  Future  of  Identity  in  the 
Information  Society.  Retrieved  on  5  August,  2008, 
from 
http://www.fidis.net 

[25]  Josung,  A.  and  Pope,  S.  (2005).    User  Centric  Identity  Management. 
CRC  for  Enterprise  Distributed  Systems  Technology  (DSTC  Pty  Ltd).  
Retrieved on 10 April, 2008, from http://sky.fit.qut.edu.au/josang/papers 
  Hong  Kong  Special 

  Identity  Management. 

[26]  HKSKR  (2008). 

Administrative  

[27]  Zhoa, S., Grasmuck, S. and Martin, J. (2008).  Identity construction on 
Facebook: Digital empowerment in anchored relationships. Computers in 
Human Behavior. Vol. 24, pp. 816–1836.  

[28]  Facebook Connect (2009). Facebook Developers Blog. [On-line] 

Available: http://developers.facebook.com [Accessed: 23 October 2010] 
[29]  MySpace  Data  Availability  (2009).  MySpace  Developers  Forum. 

Retrieved on 23 October, 2010, from http://developer.myspace.com 

[30]  Hobson, D. (2008). Social Networking – Not always friendly. Computer 

Fraud and Security. Feb 2008. pp. 4-6. 

[31]  Internet  Security  (2007).    Keeping  children  safe  online.  Biometric 

Technology Today, June 2007. pp. 4-5. 

VII.  CONCLUSION 

In conclusion, it is evident that online social networking 
has  several  areas  where  controls  and  effective  IDM 
processes  are  needed.    These  vulnerabilities  are  open  to 
exploitation by malicious users, in turn reducing the levels 
of trust exhibited by users in the system and in other users. 

In  order  to  address  these  shortfalls  and  increase  trust 
levels,  an  experiment  took  place  to  assess  the  current 
controls and identity management processes evident within 
the  current  social  netwroking  environment.    Based  on  the 
experiment  findings,  a  proposed  set  of  controls  was 
presented  which  aimed  to  provide  an  effective  means  to 
enhance  user  trust  through  their  implementation  and 
management.  User trust and confidence for both the system 
and  other  users  are  market 
the 
implementation of an effective set of controls can assist in 
achieving them.   

requirements,  and 

REFERENCES 

[1]  Benevenuto,  F.,  Rodrigues,  T.,  Cha,  M.  and  Almeida,  V.  (2009). 

Characterizing User Behaviour in Online Social Networks. Computer  

[2]  Science  Department,  Federal  University  of  Minas  Gerais,  Brazil. 

Retrieved 4 May, 2010, from http://portal.acm.org 

[3]  Alexa  Facebook  (2010).    Web  Information  Company.    Web  Usage 

Report. Retrieved 4 May, 2010, from http://www.alexa.com 

[4]  Alexa  MySpace  (2010).    Web  Information  Company.    Web  Usage 

Report. Retrieved 4 May, 2010, from http://www.alexa.com 

[5]  Fidis WP 2. (2006). D2.6: Identity in a Networked World – Use Cases 
and Scenarios. Future of Identity in the Information Society. Retrieved 5 
August, 2008, from http://www.fidis.net 
Jones,  H.  and  Soltren,  J.  (2005).    Facebook:  Threats  to  Privacy.  
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science. Vol. 6, pp. 30-106. 

[6] 

[7]  Online Social Networking (2010). How online social networks work.  

Retrieved on 10 May, 2010, from http://communication.howstuff 
works.com 

[8]  Hinduja, S. and Patchin, J. (2008).  Personal information of adolescents 
on the Internet: A quantitative content analysis of MySpace. Journal of 
Adolescence. Vol. 31, pp. 125–146. 

[9]  Hansen,  M.,  Pfitzmann,  A.  and  Steinbrecher,  S.  (2008).  Identity 
Management throughout one's whole life. Information Security Technical 
Report (2008). 

[10]  Computer Fraud (2008). Woman accused of bullying teen on MySpace. 

Computer Fraud and Security. June 2008, pp. 1-2. 

[11]  Social  Network  Concerns  (2010).  Facebook  vs  MySpace:  Concerns  on 
from 

17  May, 

2010, 

on 

Social  Networking.  Retrieved 
http://theambitious.org 

[12]  Social  Media  Concerns  (2010).    Social  Media  Risks:  The  Basics. 

Retrieved on 11 May, 2010, from http://www.csoonline.com 

[13]  Beldad, B., de Jong, M. and Steehouder, M. (2010). How shall I trust the 
faceless  and  the  intangible?  A  literature  review  on  the  antecedents  of 
online trust.  Computers in Human Behaviour. Vol. 26, pp 857–869. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

