Social Engineering from a Normative Ethics

Perspective

F Mouton

M M Malan

H S Venter

Defence, Peace, Safety and Security

Information and Computer Security

Department of Computer Science

Command, Control and Information Warfare
Council for Scientiﬁc and Industrial Research

Pretoria, South Africa

Email: moutonf@gmail.com

Architecture Research Group

University of Pretoria
Pretoria, South Africa

Email: malan747@gmail.com

University of Pretoria
Pretoria, South Africa

Email: hventer@cs.up.ac.za

and gathering information from various sources.

Abstract—Social engineering is deeply entrenched in both
computer science and social psychology. Knowledge on both of
these disciplines is required to perform social engineering based
research. There are several ethical concerns and requirements
that need to be taken into account whilst performing social
engineering research on participants to ensure that harm
does not come to the participants. These requirements are
not yet formalised and most researchers are unaware of the
ethical concerns whilst performing social engineering research.
This paper identiﬁes several ethical concerns regarding social
engineering in public communication, penetration testing and
social engineering research. This paper discusses the identiﬁed
ethical concerns with regards to two different normative ethics
approaches namely utilitarianism and deontology. All of the
identiﬁed ethical concerns and their corresponding ethical
perspectives are provided as well as practical examples of where
these formalised ethical concerns for social engineering research
can be utilised.

Index

Terms—Consequentialism;

Ethical
Concerns; Ethics; Penetration Testing; Public Communication;
Social Engineering; Social Engineering Research; Utilitarianism;

Deontology;

I. INTRODUCTION

Social engineering,

the human element

in the context of this paper, refers
to various techniques that are utilised to obtain information
through the exploitation of human vulnerability in order to
bypass security systems [1]. As clearly stated by various
is the ’glitch’ or vulnerable
authors,
element within security systems [2],
is the
basic ’good’ human-natured characteristics that make people
vulnerable to the techniques used by social engineers, as it
activates various psychological vulnerabilities that could be
used to manipulate the individual into disclosing the requested
information [5].

[3],

[4].

It

Many individuals are unaware of the extent to which these
techniques can be used in an attack. These individuals may
not even realise that they were a victim of such an attack
or they do not believe that they will ever be a victim. The
majority of the public do not realise the value of some
information that they willingly disclose and the impact of
social consequences if this information is used maliciously.
The social engineer is dedicated to researching various aspects

On the other end of the spectrum, the individual may believe
that they will not fall prey to such an attack, as they will
be able to recognise such an attack. However,
the social
engineer is a skilled human manipulator, preying on human
vulnerabilities using various psychological triggers that could
foil human judgment [6].

Social engineering attacks can have unintended after-effects
on the victim. The after-effects can be so severe that it may,
for example, lead to suicide. There are several ethical concerns
related to social engineering attacks, and consequences of such
attacks may be minimised if the right actions are taken after
the attack.
Whilst

on
participants,
there are several ethical requirements to take
into consideration. The problem is that these requirements
are not yet formalised and most researchers are unaware of
the ethical concerns whilst performing social engineering
research. This paper aims to discuss ethical concerns that
need to be taken into consideration when social engineering
is performed in a non-malicious fashion.

engineering

performing

research

social

These non-malicious attacks are categorised into three
different environments in which these attacks can happen.
The three environments deﬁned for this paper is public
communications such as radio and television, penetration
testing and social engineering research.

Social engineering attacks performed in one of

these
environments are not intended to cause harm to the victim
or to use information gathered in the attack maliciously.

This research is important in the computer science domain
as social engineering is a computer science ﬁeld with a very
strong cross disciplinary relation to social psychology [7], [8],
[6]. Computer science researchers are not always aware of all
the ethical concerns whilst dealing with human participants
in a research study. It is for these reasons that research is
conducted on the ethics regarding social engineering in order
to simplify the ethical constraints for a computer scientist.

The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section
II provides a background about both social engineering and
ethics. Section III introduces three chosen environments in
which social engineering attacks can be performed. Section

IV lists and describes different social engineering ethical
concerns framed in scenarios from each environment. Section
V discusses the ethical concerns from section IV in terms of
two ethical perspectives. Section VI provides the reader with
practical examples of where these social engineering ethical
concerns can be utilised and Section VII concludes this paper
with a summary and future work.

II. BACKGROUND

The following section is divided into two subsections.
Subsection A gives a background on social engineering and
social engineering attacks. Subsection B discusses ethics
according to two main approaches to normative ethics.

A. Social Engineering

According to Mitnick & Simon [1], social engineering is
deﬁned as the techniques used to exploit human vulnerability
to bypass security systems in order to gather information. As
indicated by this deﬁnition, social engineering attacks imply
interaction with other individuals, indicating the psychological
aspect of social engineering.

triggers,

Various psychological vulnerabilities and triggers, used by
social engineers, have been identiﬁed, which aim to inﬂuence
the individual’s emotional state and cognitive abilities in order
to obtain information. To successfully defend against these
psychological
the individual will need to have a
clear understanding of these triggers in order to recognise
each during a social engineering attack. There are several
psychological vulnerabilities,
the most common ones are
deﬁned as: strong affect, overloading, reciprocation, diffusion
of responsibility and moral duty, integrity and consistency,
authority and ﬁnally deceptive relationships [9], [10], [3], [11].
These triggers could be used to perform a social engineering
attack on an unsuspecting victim, which could lead the victim
to experience a sense of discomfort, whether just an uneasiness
or even anxiety, as all these attacks prey on the victim’s
psychological vulnerabilities. One would expect that a victim
would be able to use these clues of discomfort to detect that
he is being targeted by a social engineering attack. However,
this is the ideal and not reality, as the human reasoning and
decision-making process is extremely complex, and prone to
error.

B. Ethics

This paper focuses on two main approaches to normative
ethics: Utilitarianism and deontology [12]. Normative ethics
is the ’right’ and the ’wrong’ of interpreted social behaviour
[13]. The main difference between these two perspectives is
the way a moral dilemma is approached, and not necessarily
the consequences of it.

The

following

different
approaches of normative ethics and how each ethical
perspective is measured.

discusses

section

two

the

1) Utilitarianism: Utilitarianism is the most common form
of consequentialism. As in consequentialism, utilitarianism
says that the rightness of an action is determined by the
consequences of the speciﬁed action. Utilitarianist ethicists
measure whether the action is ethical based on the outcomes
of the action [12]. This approach involves analysing the impact
of the individual’s actions and the impact that this action has
on the majority of other people.

This can be either for the interest of the individual or for
the majority of society [14]. For the purposes of this paper,
to test utilitarianism one needs to decide how it affects the
majority of society. If the majority of society gains from the
consequences, it is ethical, otherwise it is unethical.

To apply Utilitarianist ethics to an ethical concern one
needs to consider the consequences of performing a social
engineering attack on an individual and anyone else affected
by the consequence of
In utilitarianism the
consequences are assessed in terms of people’s well-being.
If the social engineering attack produces the best overall
consequences for the community’s well-being and the beneﬁts
to the community outweigh the consequence to the victim,
then the utilitarian considers it ethically correct [15].

this attack.

It

the

Unlike

previous

2) Deontology:

is also known as ’duty’ or

approaches,
deontology focuses on the adherence to the rules of the
world in order to measure whether the action is right or
wrong.
’obligation’-based
ethics [16]. Deontology focuses on the ethical act and some
deontologists believe that there are universal rules regarding
right
[14]. Deontology protects
the individual more than it protects the community[14].
Deontologists live in a world of moral rules, such as [16].

and wrong behaviour

• It is wrong to kill innocent people
• It is wrong to steal
• It is wrong to tell lies
• It is right to keep promises

To test for deontological ethics, the basic rule ”do onto
others only that
to which they have consented” [17] is
followed. It is ethical if the individual is doing a morally right
action, regardless of the consequenses [16].

To apply deontological ethics to an ethical concern one
needs to consider whether a social engineering attack would
be conforming to moral rules that seem a priori logically
correct. From a deontological perspective the aforementioned
rules need to be adhered to, irrespective of their consequenses,
for the most part. If any part of the social engineering attack
does not strictly adhere to the deontological rules, the entire
attack can be seen as unethical. The opposite would be true
in the case where the social engineering attack adheres to all
the deontological rules of the world.

The following section discusses three chosen environments
in which social engineering attacks can be performed. It also
shows how public communication and penetration testing ﬁt
in with social engineering research.

III. SOCIAL ENGINEERING ENVIRONMENTS
This paper focuses on three main environments in which
social engineering can be performed. The three environments
are public communication, penetration testing and social
engineering research. These environments were selected as
they provide the broadest base to identify speciﬁc scenarios in
which social engineering attacks are performed.

The following subsections describe each of

environments.

the three

A. Public Communication

This environment is where communication is made to the
public through some public communication medium such as
radio or television. Social engineering attacks that happen in
this environment are normally for the goal of entertaining
listeners or viewers. The intent of these attacks is mostly not to
harm the victim, although the harm can occur unbeknownst to
the presenter. The presenter may be unaware that he or she is
performing a social engineering attack. The performed attacks
can also have unintended harmful consequences.

B. Penetration Testing

This environment is where social engineering penetration
testing is performed. Social engineering penetration tests
are designed to mimic attacks that actual malicious social
engineers will use to steal ones data [18]. This can include
attacks over the phone or the internet, but also onsite, doing
a ”break-in” to a physical place. The intent for these tests is
not to cause harm, but rather to help improve the security by
ﬁnding the vulnerabilities in the security system, whether it is
physical or virtual.

The subjects who fall prey to the penetration test can feel
guilty that they were not vigilant and this could lead to further
personal harm.

Management is required to view the penetration test report
in an objective manner and not to take action against the
employees who fall prey to the attack.

C. Social Engineering Research

Social engineering research is another environment

in
which social engineering techniques may be required. In this
environment social engineering attacks and social engineering
awareness testing can potentially be performed as a part of
research. Social engineering research is a large environment
and can also encapsulate both scenarios in penetration
testing and public communication. This overlap of the social
engineering research environment is depicted in ﬁgure 1.

Social engineering research consists of several techniques
which are required to gain accurate research results. In some
of the research scenarios the participants are required to be
subjected to social engineering techniques without providing
informed consent. The intent of this research is not to harm
the participant, although the participants may be required to
be unaware that they are participating in social engineering
research. The reason informed consent from the participant is
not provided is because the participants will act differently

Fig. 1. Overﬂow of Environments

if they aware that he is participating in social engineering
research and this may provide inaccurate results.

The next section lists some scenarios of social engineering
attacks within these three environments. Ethical concerns
related to each of the scenarios are also extracted.

IV. SOCIAL ENGINEERING ETHICAL CONCERNS
the aforementioned environments allows the
Each of
researchers
to provide
scenarios, within these
environments. The goal of the scenarios is to frame the
different social engineering ethical concerns and to provide
a context in which to examine the ethical concerns.

several

In each of these scenarios a single ethical concern, directly
relating to the speciﬁc scenario and environment, is provided.
The goal of this section is to provide the reader with all of the
ethical concerns regarding social engineering whilst providing
a scenario in which to frame and later on discuss the ethical
concern.

The following subsections list all of the ethical concerns
and the speciﬁc scenario in which to frame them from the
different environments.

A. Public Communications

The following scenarios are all

framed in the social

engineering public communications environment.

1) Radio prankster scenario: This scenario uses a radio
prankster from a South African radio station, Highveld Stereo,
Darren ’Whackhead’ Simpson [19]. Darren is well known
for the pranks he pulls on people for radio entertainment.
Darren’s career as a prankster has been so successful that he
has published several audio prank collections discs which are
sold all over the world.

In order to arrange a prank by Darren, someone who knows
the victim sets up a prank with Darren after which he performs
the actual prank. Darren thus has permission from either
friends or family of the victim in order to perform the prank.
Darren uses many social engineering techniques to convince
including background noises and

the victim of his story,
different voices.

He also gathers information of the person he is pranking
beforehand in order to trick the person into believing his

story. His intent is not to harm the victims, but to provide
entertainment to Highveld Stereo listeners.

After each prank, Darren reveals his identity and debriefs

to the victim.

The ethical concern for this scenario is as follows: Is it
ethical when delegated permission is used to perform social
engineering techniques for public comical relief?

2) Con artistry scenario: The ﬁnal scenario from the public
communications scenario is related to con artists on television.
There are several con artists on television who give audience
members false hope by playing on their emotions. An example
of this is Marietta Theunissen from ”Die ander kant” (The
other side) [20]. She allows participants to ”speak” to their
deceased relatives. She states her ﬁeld of work as ”Psychic
and Clairvoyant Readings, Health and Self-development”.

Psychics, such as Marietta, and Tarot card readers use
psychological methods and information gathering techniques
in order to play on emotions and make people believe they
are speaking to their deceased loved ones, or to give them a
glimpse into their future endeavours.

They trick people into believing these things by using the
victim’s emotions as a weapon. The individuals want to believe
that they have just spoken to their deceased family members
and therefore the psychics can easily manipulate these people
into believing that they have indeed spoken to their deceased
family members.

General phrases, such as ”Your grandmother is happy and
loves you very much”, are used which can be applicable to
almost any individual over a certain age. In the case where the
victim has a deceased grandmother, the victim will have an
overwhelming emotion and they will believe that the phrase
is aimed at them speciﬁcally.

In essence these con-artists give people a sense of false hope
by tricking them with social engineering techniques. The intent
is not to hurt these people, but to gain money or fame out of
it.

The ethical concern for this scenario is as follows: Is it
ethical when information gathering techniques are used to
provide participants with false information and to exploit them
for either ﬁnancial gain or fame?

This concludes the ethical concerns related to the public
communication environment. The following section deals with
the penetration testing environment.

B. Penetration Testing

The following scenarios are all

framed in the social

engineering penetration testing environment.

1) Receptionist scenario:

In this scenario a penetration
tester is hired to attempt to gain sensitive information from the
organisation. The penetration tester chooses the receptionist as
a possible weak link in the organisation.

The receptionist’s duty involves helping customers, to the
best of her ability, while the customer is in the reception area
of the organisation.

The penetration tester enters the reception area as a
customer. While waiting for a scheduled appointment, the
penetration tester takes out his laptop and realises that he has
no network access. He sees that there is a network access
point which he can potentially utilise in order to connect
his computer to the internet as well as the network of the
organisation.

The penetration tester asks the receptionist if he could just
quickly connect his network cable to the network access point
as he urgently needs to check his e-mail. The receptionist
is not aware of the dangers involved in providing access to
the network and it is also not against company policy to
assist customers in the reception area, thus she agrees that
the penetration tester may use the network access point.
With access gained to the organisation’s network,

the
penetration tester is now able to hack into the inner network
and extract sensitive information as needed.

The ethical concern for this scenario is as follows: Is it
ethical
to report a social engineering penetration test as
successful when the incident occurred because the employee
was correctly performing his or her duty?

2) Penetration test reporting scenario: This scenario deals
with the information that is required for the penetration tester’s
report which is sent back to the organisation.

When an employee is susceptible to a speciﬁc penetration
test, the employee’s details can potentially be recorded. The
employer may request a full detailed report which consists of
all employee names that were susceptible to these attacks.

The intent of a penetration test is to help the organisation
ﬁnd the vulnerabilities in their security. If the vulnerability is
an employee, management might feel the need to get rid of
the employee in order to reduce the vulnerability. This may
not be the right action as the employee may be doing his or
her job correctly or the employee was not trained to be able
to identify social engineering attacks.

The solution to the problem is rather to train the employee
to be able to correctly identify social engineering attacks. This
employee already has been subjected to a social engineering
penetration test and he or she will be much more vigilant than
a new employee who has never heard of social engineering
before. If the solution from management is to replace the
employee it might be detrimental to the employee if his name
is recorded in the penetration testing report.

The ethical concern for this scenario is as follows: Is
it ethical to provide the name of the employees who were
susceptible to the penetration tests in the report
to an
authoritative ﬁgure even though there may be consequences
to the employees?

This concludes the social engineering penetration testing
environment. The following section deals speciﬁcally with
scenarios unique to social engineering research as both this
section and the previous section has scenarios which could
also occur in social engineering research.

C. Social Engineering Research

the social engineering research experiment?

1) Awareness research and debrieﬁng scenario:

In this
scenario it is required to measure, using social engineering
research, how susceptible a group of participants would be to
social engineering attacks. In order to test whether a person
is susceptible to social engineering, it is required to perform
social engineering techniques or provide social engineering
examples to the participant.

In the case where the participants are susceptible to these
techniques or examples, the participants can feel as they were
fooled or tricked during the experiment. This can lead to the
participants doubting the decisions they make and also make
them feel like they are gullible to fall prey to the tactics.

In most of these cases when testing social engineering
awareness, the general consensus is that several participants
will fall prey to these types of social engineering attacks.
The social engineering attacks that are tested during such an
experiment will test whether the individuals will be overly
helpful or accommodating. It is common human nature to be
both helpful and accommodating to other individuals and thus
it is not necessarily wrong to fall prey to a social engineering
attack.

The effect on the participant can be minimised as long as
the participant is correctly debriefed. The debrieﬁng session
will include a one on one discussion between the researcher
and the participant. The participant is then informed that it is
common human nature to fall prey to some social engineering
attacks.

The ethical concern for this scenario is as follows: Is it
ethical to perform social engineering awareness research and
how should the participant be debriefed?

2) Informed consent scenario: This scenario requires the
participants to provide informed consent for a speciﬁc research
scenario and then be subjected to another social engineering
based research scenario.

It is required to fool the participant into thinking that he
or she is part of a different study so that the participants will
not be biased against social engineering attacks during the
experiment.

In order to receive accurate results from the participants
during a social engineering based research experiment, it is
required that the participants are not aware of the type of
experiment they are subjected to. The test can be framed to
be a normal test so that the participants are unaware that they
are partaking in a social engineering research experiment.

The researcher, who requests informed consent from the
participant for a different research scenario than the one the
participant is going to subjected to, is not doing it to be
malicious or harmful to the participant. The researcher is only
trying to limit any bias that a participant might have to the
speciﬁc ﬁeld and to ensure accurate experiment results from
the participant.

The ethical concern for this scenario is as follows: Is it
ethical to mislead a participant when it comes to informed
consent as it is required in order to get accurate results from

This concludes the section on all of the ethical concerns
regarding social engineering. All of
the different ethical
concerns that have been identiﬁed in this section are now
discussed from the point of view of each of the different ethical
approaches to normative ethics.

V. ETHICAL CONCERNS AND THE

CORRESPONDING ETHICAL PERSPECTIVE

This section discusses each of the identiﬁed ethical concerns
by examining how the different normative approaches can be
utilised to answer these questions. The two different normative
approaches that will be used are the utilitarianism perspective
and deontological perspective.

A. Is it ethical when delegated permission is used to perform
social engineering techniques for public comical relief?

from this

1) Utilitarianism: The majority of

the public gained
entertainment
scenario, which outweighs any
consequences there may be on the victim of the attack. From
a utilitarian perspective, this is ethical as the joy and laughter
of the majority outweighs the humiliation of the victim.

2) Deontology: The social engineer gained delegated
permission to perform the social engineering techniques,
however, permission was not granted from the victim self.
There was also trickery and lying involved in performing the
social engineering attack which are against the moral rules
of deontologists. From a deontological perspective, this is
unethical.

B. Is it ethical when information gathering techniques are
used to provide participants with false information and to
exploit them for either ﬁnancial gain or fame?

1) Utilitarianism:

In this scenario the con artist gains
either fame or fortune through utilising social engineering
techniques. The rest of the world do not gain anything from
this, not even the victims who believes their happy with their
false hope. The only individual who gains anything from this
is the con artist. This is thus unethical from a utilitarian
perspective.

2) Deontology: The social engineer exploited and lied
to the victim which breaks several moral rules. From a
deontological perspective, this is unethical.

C. Is it ethical to report a social engineering penetration test
as successful when the incident occurred because the employee
was correctly performing his or her duty?

1) Utilitarianism: Reporting on the successful penetration
test can cause the employee to bare consequences, however,
the organisation greatly beneﬁts from it. By seeing the report,
the organisation can better their guidelines and regulations
so that future penetration tests as well as real attacks will
not be successful. From a utilitarian perspective, the beneﬁts
of the majority of the organisation outweigh the possible
consequences on the employee. Reporting on the successful

penetration test is seen as ethical from a utilitarian perspective
due to the beneﬁt of the organisation.

2) Deontology: The outcome of the penetration test

is
that it was successful. From a deontological perspective it is
required to both report on the social engineering penetration
test and that
the information in the social engineering
penetration test report is correct and accurate. In order to
oblige to the rules and not be dishonest about the facts, the
social engineering penetration test should be reported and
accurately so. From a deontological perspective, this is ethical.

D. Is it ethical to provide the name of the employees who
were susceptible to the penetration tests in the report to an
authoritative ﬁgure even though there may be consequences
to the employees?

1) Utilitarianism: The employee can be either trained or
dismissed to avoid future vulnerabilities for the organisation.
This will lead to a better future for the organisation as a whole.
As the organisation is now more aware of what vulnerabilities
exists within the organisation, the organisation can perform
an informed decision to plan for the future. Since this beneﬁts
the majority of the organisation, according to the utilitarian
perspective, it is ethical.

2) Deontology: Assuming the case where the penetration
tester is required, by management, to report the full detail of
the penetration test to the organisation, it would be ethically
correct to disclose the employee names as the focus is on the
rule that the penetration tester will provide a report with full
details.

From a deontological perspective,

it

is ethical as the

penetration follows the moral rule of full disclosure.

E. Is it ethical
research and how should the participant be debriefed?

to perform social engineering awareness

1) Utilitarianism: Research is needed even if the research
may be harmful to some of the participants. As long as the
ultimate goal of the research is to improve society as a whole,
it will be seen as ethical from a utilitarian perspective. From a
utilitarian perspective, any research that is performed to better
the greater whole of society is seen as ethical.

2) Deontology: Social engineering awareness testing has
the ultimate goal
to trick participants into answering the
questions wrongly. As deontology has a rule that participants
should not be lied to or tricked during research, this will be
seen as unethical.

From a deontological perspective, any research that requires
that the participants should be lied to or tricked is deemed as
unethical.

F. Is it ethical to mislead a participant when it comes to
informed consent as it is required in order to get accurate
results from the social engineering research experiment?

The

1) Utilitarianism:

research
experiment may be harmful to the participant if informed
consent was given for a different research experiment. In
some scenarios accurate results can only be gained if the

engineering

social

participant is unaware that they are partaking in the research.
Participants may behave differently if they are aware that they
are forming part of a social engineering research experiment.
It is important to limit the bias that the participant would
have towards the social engineering research experiment to
ensure the most accurate results from the experiment.

Since accurate results are required to improve society as a
whole and this also outweighs the harm that can possibly be
done to the participant, this action is seen as ethical from a
utilitarian perspective.

2) Deontology:

Informed consent was not given by the
participant for participating in the social engineering research
experiment. Since this breaks one of the social engineering
research rules it can already be seen as unethical. The
participant may also feel bad for being tricked since the
participant is not aware that he or she is participating in a
social engineering research experiment.

From a deontological perspective, it is unethical as the
participant is fooled into participating in a research experiment
that the participant did not sign up for.

To summarise this section, the following three tables lists all
of the ethical concerns in the three environments and whether
they are ethical from the point of view of each of the different
ethical perspectives.

ETHICAL CONCERNS IN PUBLIC COMMUNICATION

TABLE I

m

s
i
n
a
i
r
a
t
i
l
i
t

y
g
o
l
o
t
n
o
e
U
D
Yes No

No

No

Is
it ethical when delegated permission is used
to perform social engineering techniques for public
comical relief?
Is it ethical when information gathering techniques are
used to provide participants with false information and
to exploit them for either ﬁnancial gain or fame?

ETHICAL CONCERNS IN PENETRATION TESTING

TABLE II

m

s
i
n
a
i
r
a
t
i
l
i
t

y
g
o
l
o
t
n
o
e
U
D
Yes Yes

Yes Yes

Is it ethical to report a social engineering penetration
test as successful when the incident occurred because
the employee was correctly performing his or her duty?
Is it ethical to provide the name of the employees who
were susceptible to the penetration tests in the report
to an authoritative ﬁgure even though there may be
consequences to the employees?

ETHICAL CONCERNS IN SOCIAL ENGINEERING RESEARCH

TABLE III

B. Ethical guideline for penetration testers

m
s
i
n
a
i
r
a
t
i
l
i
t

y
g
o
l
o
t
n
o
e
U
D
Yes No

Yes No

Is it ethical to perform social engineering awareness
research and how should the participant be debriefed?
Is it ethical to mislead a participant when it comes
to informed consent as it is required in order to get
accurate results from the social engineering research
experiment?

The following section provides practical examples on how

this research can be utilised.

VI. PRACTICAL EXAMPLES FOR THE ETHICAL

CONCERNS

This paper has now provided one with six different ethical
these ethical
concerns and how one would reason about
concerns from the different ethical perspectives. This section
provides the reader with two practical examples where this
research can now be utilised.

The following sections discuss practical examples where
this research can be utilised such as ethical committees and
ethical guideline for penetration testers.

A. Ethical committees

Ethical committees have a tedious job which entails
verifying that any research performed adheres to several
ethical guidelines. For the social engineering ﬁeld speciﬁcally
there is no formalised set of rules by which to measure the
ethical impact of a social engineering attack.

This research can be used as a tool by any ethical committee
in order to measure the ethical impact of social engineering
based research. It provides ethical committees with what each
of the three different ethical perspectives have to say about
each of the different ethical concerns. This research can also
be used to answer certain ethical concerning questions in order
to determine whether a single action in social engineering is
ethical or not.

As an example, a student comes to the ethical committee
and this student wants to conduct social engineering based
research that is speciﬁc to a certain organisation. He also wants
to research the effects social engineering attacks may have
on the organisational structure of the organisation. The table
of ethical concerns allows one to easily determine the major
ethical concerns which are associated with this research. It also
provides both the student and the ethical committee an easier
way to measure the ethical viability of the research proposal.
This research can also provide an ethical committee with the
two different ethical perspectives and how they are addressed
in terms of social engineering. From the table one can clearly
see that if the ethical committee examines project proposals
based on a utilitarianism perspective more projects will be
approved than when examining the same project proposals
from a deontological perspective.

Penetration testers often have to decide whether a certain
penetration test would be deemed to be ethical or not [21].
Also, form the scenarios that were provided, there were more
scenarios that could be taken directly from the penetration
testing environment as it is such a difﬁcult environment in
which to judge whether a certain action is ethical or not.

This research allows social engineering penetration testers
to have a good guideline in order to measure their applicable
social engineering penetration tests. The table can also assist
the penetration testers when it comes to ethical concerns when
reporting on a certain successful inﬁltration. It is important to
the penetration testers that they report their information in an
ethical manner as they may potentially have a major impact
on an employee’s life if the employee is dismissed due to the
penetration testing report.

The penetration testers will also beneﬁt from having the
different ethical perspectives on each of the different ethical
concerns. Having the different ethical perspectives allows the
penetration tester to examine the ethical concern with the
different perspectives in order to make an informed decision
about their actions.

The next section of this paper now concludes the work
by providing a summary of the ethical concerns of social
engineering, how this research can be utilised in a practical
example and future work.

VII. CONCLUSION

Social engineering is deeply entrenched in both computer
science and social psychology. Knowledge on both of
these disciplines is required to perform social engineering
based techniques. As all of these techniques are ordinarily
performed on human participants, the ethical impact that social
engineering has on the participants needs to be considered.
There are several ethical concerns and requirements that need
to be taken into account whilst performing social engineering
research on participants to ensure that harm does not come to
the participants.

The problem is that

these requirements are not yet
formalised and most researchers are unaware of the ethical
concerns whilst performing social engineering research. This
paper addressed this problem by ﬁrst providing the reader
with a thorough background on both social engineering and
the two main ethical perspectives from the normative ethics
approaches.

The paper provides three environments in which social
engineering can occur. These environments are public
communication, penetration testing and social engineering
research. As the social engineering research environment is
such a broad environment it can also contain scenarios of
both public communication and penetration testing. Each of
the three environments is subdivided into several different
scenarios applicable to each of these environments.

The scenarios are used in order to develop and to provide
a frame in which the ethical concerns regarding social
engineering were proposed. Each scenario has a single ethical

[18] SocialEngineer.org,

penetration
https://www.social-engineer.com/social-engineer-pentesting/,
May 18, 2013.

engineering

“Social

testing,”
accessed

[19] TVSA,

”whackhead”
http://www.tvsa.co.za/actorproﬁle.asp?actorid=5107,
18, 2013.

“Darren

simpson,”
accessed May

[20] other

world’s

tomorrow,

“Marietta

theunissen,”

http://www.otherworldstomorrow.com/index.php?q=con,58,Marietta
Theunissen, accessed May 15, 2013.

[21] Social-Engineer.org,

“Social

present
and
Available:
http://www.social-engineer.org/episode-010-social-engineering-past-pres
ent-and-future/

engineering
2010.

[Online].

2010,”

future

past,

concern associated with it. Each ethical concern has a scenario
in which to frame the ethical concern to test whether the action
taken is ethical or not.

Each of the ethical concerns that are proposed is measured
against each of
the two different ethical perspectives
namely utilitarianism and deontology. Each ethical concern
is answered by utilising all of the ethical perspectives.

This paper also provides practical examples where this
research can be used. Some of the practical examples include
that the research can be utilised as a tool for ethical committees
as well as an ethical guideline for penetration testers.

Further research can be performed to explore any other
practical examples where this research can potentially be
utilised. This research can also be further developed to
be training material to teach both university level students
and penetration testers about social engineering and the
ethical concerns regarding social engineering. More ethical
perspectives should be examined, such as virtue ethics, in
order to provide a more thorough investigation of the ethical
concerns regarding social engineering.

REFERENCES

[1] K. D. Mitnick and W. L. Simon, The art of deception: Controlling the

human element of security. Wiley, 2001.

[2] J. Debrosse and D. Harley, “Malice through the looking glass: behaviour
analysis for the next decade,” in Proceedings of the 19th Virus Bulletin
International Conference, 2009.

[3] K. Mitnick and W. Simon, “The art of intrusion: the real stories behind

the exploits of hackers, intruders & deceivers,” 2005.

[4] J. W. Scheeres, “Establishing the human ﬁrewall:

reducing an
engineering attacks,” DTIC

individual’s vulnerability to social
Document, Tech. Rep., 2008.

[5] G. L. Orgill, G. W. Romney, M. G. Bailey, and P. M. Orgill,
“The urgency for effective user privacy-education to counter social
engineering attacks on secure computer systems,” in Proceedings of the
5th conference on Information technology education. ACM, 2004, pp.
177–181.

[6] F. Mouton, M. Malan, and H. Venter, “Development of cognitive

functioning psychological measures for the seadm,” 2012.

[7] M. Bezuidenhout, F. Mouton, and H. Venter, “Social engineering attack
detection model: Seadm,” in Information Security for South Africa
(ISSA), 2010.

IEEE, 2010, pp. 1–8.

[8] S. Granger, “Social engineering fundamentals, part i: hacker tactics,”

Security Focus, December, vol. 18, 2001.

[9] A. N. Chantler and R. Broadhurst, “Social engineering and crime

[11] M. Workman, “A test of interventions for security threats from social
engineering,” Information Management & Computer Security, vol. 16,
no. 5, pp. 463–483, 2008.

[12] L.

N.

Gowdy,

“Normative

http://www.ethicsmorals.com/ethicsnormative.html,
18, 2013.

ethics,”
accessed May

[13] G. Harman, “Moral philosophy meets social psychology: Virtue ethics
and the fundamental attribution error,” in Proceedings of the Aristotelian
society.

JSTOR, 1999, pp. 315–331.

[14] D. Knights and M. OLeary, “Leadership, ethics and responsibility to the
other,” Journal of Business Ethics, vol. 67, no. 2, pp. 125–137, 2006.

[15] BBC, “Consequentialism,” http://www.bbc.co.uk/ethics/introduction

/consequentialism 1.shtml, accessed May 19, 2013.

[16] ——, “Duty-based ethics,” http://www.bbc.co.uk/ethics/introduction/

duty 1.shtml, accessed May 19, 2013.

[17] L. Alexander and M. Moore, “Deontological ethics,” in The Stanford

Encyclopedia of Philosophy, winter 2012 ed., E. N. Zalta, Ed., 2012.

[10] D. Gragg, “A multi-layer defense against social engineering,” SANS

prevention in cyberspace,” 2006.

Insitute Reading Room, 2002.

