Testing  the  Harmonised  Digital  Forensic 

Investigation  Process  Model using  an  Android 

Mobile  Phone

Stacey Omeleze1 and H. S. Venter2

ICSA Research Group

Computer Science Department

University of Pretoria

Lynnwood Road, Pretoria, South Africa

1 staceyaomeleze@gmail.com

2 hventer@cs.up.ac.za

for any proposed digital

Abstract—Mobile forensics is a branch of digital forensics
relating to the recovery of digital evidence from mobile devices
under forensically sound conditions. Mobile forensics is consid-
ered to be at an infant stage with different investigation process
models being applied. The biggest challenge in many of the
available digital forensic investigation process models lies in their
lack of testing before being fully applied to mobile forensics.
Furthermore,
forensic investigation
process model to be approved by the scientiﬁc community, it
has to be tested. The Harmonised Digital Forensic Investigation
(HDFI) process model is currently in the working draft stage
towards becoming an international standard for digital forensic
investigations (ISO/IEC 27043), thus the need for its testing. In
this paper, the (HDFI) process model is tested using an Android
mobile phone. The selection of an Android mobile phone is
motivated by the fact that Android mobile phones have the
greatest share of the mobile market index. In the last three
years, for example, the market share index for mobile phones put
Android mobile devices at 75% of the entire smartphone market.
Through observing the ﬁndings of the test using an Android
mobile phone, this paper demonstrates that conducting mobile
forensics using the HDFI process model produces satisfactory
results.

Keywords—Mobile forensics, Android mobile phone, har-
monised digital forensic investigation process model, (ISO/IEC
27043), mobile forensic framework, digital forensics investigation
procedure.

I.

INTRODUCTION

Mobile forensics is a branch of digital forensics relating
to the recovery of digital evidence from mobile devices in a
forensically sound manner that will stand up to any formal
judicial enquiry [1][5]. Digital forensic science is a rapidly
evolving discipline, which applies a variety of scientiﬁc prin-
ciples to enhance digital evidence and data recovery [15].
The computing techniques used today are ﬂexible and scalable
with an increased capacity in response time. These capabilities
are geared towards an increased demand by users for faster
processing speed, portability, accessibility and, of course, less
expensive devices [4]. Users’ demand for more powerful
devices is increasing by the day, as the advent of internet
availability on portable devices, such as mobile phones, con-

tinues to expand [5]. Mobile phones are among the fastest-
growing technologies. This growth can be attributed to the way
we live our daily lives, engage in business transactions and
the increasing uptake of mobile phones by organisations for
convenient communication with clients and business partners.
This is becoming ever more possible with the uptake of cloud
computing. Users have convenient access to software and
storage as a service such as iCloud, Dropbox and Google
Drive, via their mobile phones [2]. This also implies that
users can now keep track of their activities in real
time
via their mobile phones. However, the number of criminal-
related cases involving mobile phones is growing by the day,
resulting in a source of potential evidence for digital forensic
investigations [5][11]. The testing of the harmonised digital
forensic investigation (HDFI) process model is the ﬁrst attempt
to unify the disparities in digital forensic investigations. These
tests of the HDFI process model, when successfully approved
by the ISO/IEC, will further solidify the digital forensic
investigation processes, thereby increasing the credibility of
cases investigated, especially for court proceedings. This can
be visualised, for example, when a legal counsel decides to re-
investigate a case where digital forensic investigation ﬁndings
were previously disputed. However, when such a process
model
the subsequent ﬁndings should produce
the same result as the original investigation. This can only
be achieved when there exists a standardised digital forensic
investigation process model that has been tested. The digital
forensic investigation of mobile phones is at its infant stage,
therefore there is need to test this model in order for it to
become an international standard.

is applied,

This paper, uses an Android mobile phone as a testbed to
verify the workability of the HDFI process model with mobile
phones. Testing is carried out on a real-world case. In addition,
this paper explores the strengths and weakness (if any) of the
HDFI process model when applied to mobile phone forensics.

The remainder of this paper is structured as follows:
Section II presents background concepts and elaborates on
the HDFI process model. Section III brieﬂy describes the
methodology applied, while Section IV introduces the case
scenario. Section V describes the investigation that was carried

out on the Android mobile phone using the HDFI process
model. Section VI discusses some observations and presents
some ﬁndings. Finally, section VII concludes this paper.

II. BACKGROUND

This background section introduces a description of mobile
devices with a more detailed presentation of Android phones,
especially focusing on the features that affect mobile forensics.
It also gives a brief summary of the harmonised digital
investigation process model as presented in the ISO/IEC 27043
[1].

A. Mobile Devices

In recent years, computing has shifted gear to better
operating capacities. Businesses have also adopted a faster,
easier and wider means of delivering products and services to
their clients [3]. This has been accelerated by the availability
of smart phones with high capabilities and the processing
speed of a personal computer (PC). Mobile phones have a
high storage capacity that stores data locally,
like on the
Subscriber Identity Module (SIM) card, the ﬂash memory, the
secure digital (SD) card and the embedded multi media card
(eMMC). A SIM card is made up of a processor and electronic
erasable programmable read only memory (EEPROM) with
an encryption key that stores the subscriber’s information and
enables secure communication. The EEPROM serves as the
internal memory of the device as well as the storage memory.
With constant growth in technological development, such as
stated by Moore’s law [4], every eighteen months a new
electronic circuit appears that renders computer technology
cheaper. However,
the economic impact of mobile phone
technology has created the need for phone manufacturers to
expand the capacity of these devices, by increasing the storage
capacity and operation speed and create more scalable and user
friendly interfaces [3][6]. These added features further enhance
the use of multimedia messaging services (MMS), emails,
photographs, camera and video-embedded functions, amongst
other content-rich features, that create the need for larger and
faster external ﬂash memory [11]. In order to achieve this,
the architecture of mobile phones are built with compactness,
mobility and simple functionality in mind [5].

B. Android Mobile Devices

Android mobile phones are a group of phones from dif-
ferent manufacturers with the same operating system (OS).
Android is an open-source operating system based on the
Linux kernel 2.6 OS. An Open Alliance group was formed
to enable the development of software that can enable com-
patibility and connectivity within the various mobile phone
models. The Android mobile platform has risen from its
inception in October 2008 to being the most popular mobile
operating system today. However, there are slight differences
incorporated by the various manufacturers [17][11]. It is a
highly competitive smart phone in the market with a 75%
market share index [3][6]. Android’s success can be attributed
to the large community of developers using customised ver-
sions of Java programming language with about 700,000 apps
in the Google play apps stores by the time of writing this
paper. Android application development is based on the Java

programming language, using the Android software devel-
opment kit (SDK), which includes the debugger,
libraries,
emulator, documentation, sample codes and tutorial. One of
the noticeable features of the Android phone, as with other
mobile phones, is the touch screen. Other features include the
low cost, customisable, lightweight OS that is not built from
scratch, but rather ﬁne-tuned. Furthermore, Android supports
the popular Eclipse integrated development environment (IDE)
using the Android development tools (ADT) plugin [11].

In terms of mobile forensics, the use of Linux OS in
Android phones serves as a noticeable advantage. In con-
ducting forensic investigations, the investigator can apply the
Linux OS commands such as dd, as applicable to a desktop
computer with a Linux OS installed [11], when the device is
rooted. But its security features make forensic investigation
more difﬁcult. For its security, Android mobile phones make
use of a sandbox mode [11]. The sandbox houses the user’s
applications and also serves as a security mechanism to protect
the user from unauthorised access of the system applications.
This increases the access control of the device and makes
forensic investigation more difﬁcult if the device is turned
off and requires the user’s password. An application installed
without the user’s permission cannot access resources outside
the sandbox. This can be an issue, thereby generating the need
to apply extreme forensics. A need for extreme forensics can
occur during data acquisition, when all techniques for data
acquisition such as logical, physical and chip-off is applied
during an investigation process without getting sufﬁcient in-
formation [17][11]. In forensic extraction, where physical and
logical acquisition is not yielding the required result, there
may be need to install software on the mobile device (with
authorization) for further evidence extraction [17].

C. Android Data Acquisition Techniques

There are two types of data acquisition techniques in mo-
bile phone forensic investigations; the logical and the physical
data acquisition.

I The logical Acquisition: This is the extraction of data
in the logical ﬁle allocation storage area of the mobile
phone. In Android,
the following options are applied
in extraction. i) Android debugs bridge (ADB) pull. ii)
Backup analysis. iii) The AFLogical [21]. There are sev-
eral logical data extraction software packages provided by
the major forensic kit vendors such as MicroSystematics
XRY, EnCaseNeutrino, FTK, Cellebrite universal forensic
extraction devices (UFED) and Paraben Device Seizure
[21]. However, the logical extraction of Android mobile
phones can be done as discussed below:

i ADB Pull command: The ADB Pull command Is used
for copying some of the ﬁles such as the unencrypted
applications and browse history, from the device to a
forensically ready computer system for further anal-
ysis via the command shell of the android phone,
because in most Android devices, root access is not
available [11][20][21].

ii Backup analysis: Backup analysis is used to examine
the data in the cloud. This is useful in a case where
the device’s entire data is backed up using the back up
apps. This option provides the knowledge that some

data are backed up in the cloud with the name of the
type of cloud in use.

iii AFLogical Application: AFLogical is an application
by one of the leading digital forensic developers -
viaForensic. It extracts using content provider, and
is able to access the user’s contacts, calendar, social
media, SMS/MMS and email accounts[11][21][18].

II Physical Acquisition: This is a method of acquiring
images such as deleted data or lost data for data
recovery. In Android mobile phones, there are several
techniques generally applied for physical extraction as
listed below.

i Joint test action group (JTAG) is the hardware
component used with the wiring and testing device
(part of the mobile forensic tool kit). It is con-
nected to the central processing unit (CPU) of the
mobile phone, to enable extraction directly from
the phone chips.

ii Chip-off is a process of completely removing the
needed chip off the phone’s mother board. Chip-
off is only employed in exceptional cases because
the organisational policy must be consulted or a
court order granted. Chip-off requires this higher
clearance with the chain of custody dually signed
to perform this physical extraction. Chip-off is
done by physically removing the NAND logic gate
(which is a combination of AND and NOT logic
gate) ﬂash chip and read the NAND memory with
the NAND reader (NAND reader is part of the
forensic tool kit) [20] for further data analysis.

iii The AFPhysical is one of the viaForensic software
techniques [9] used for physical acquisition. The
program acquires root privilege from the device,
ﬁnds the NAND ﬂash drive partition and images it
and then uploads the binaries of the target device.
Once the root privilege is acquired on a device,
every other acquisition method can be applied
[11][20] [21]. Acquiring root privilege in Android
devices is quite a task, but possible.

D. Digital Forensics Process Model

A process model is a deﬁned standard or method of getting
things done by applying scientiﬁc methods [10]. However, in
digital forensic science, which is a relatively new discipline
in forensic science that deals with digital evidence involving
digital devices, investigations are focused on devices that hold
data electronically like mobile phones, computers, cameras,
gaming sand box, ﬂash memory and storage devices [15]
[17][18].

At the time of this compilation, testing on various de-
vices is in progress to verify the applicability of the HDFI
process model to these digital devices. These tests include,
the dead and live forensic of computer systems, network
forensics, servers, various mobile phones, washing machines
and virtual machines. These tests are being carried out to
further validate the HDFI process model as a standard for
digital forensics investigation. This paper focuses on testing
the harmonised digital forensic investigation process model
with mobile phones, with an emphasis on the Android mobile
phone.

E. Harmonised Digital Forensics Investigation (HDFI) Pro-
cess Model

The harmonised digital forensic investigation (HDFI) pro-
cess model is a generic model in the process of standardisation
by the International Standard Organisation ISO/IEC 27043 [1].
It comprises much of the various previous models by absorbing
most of the phases in their frameworks [18]. Most signiﬁcantly
in the HDFI process model, there is the introduction of some
parallel actions as part of the HDFI process model which are
carried out concurrently with the investigation process [18].
These concurrent processes are the activities that usually occur
in forensic investigations and contributes immensely to the
entire investigation. These parallel actions include information
ﬂow, documentation, obtaining authorisation, preservation of
chain of custody and evidence preservation. The concurrent
processes, harness the integrity of ﬁndings and adheres to the
preservation of the chain of custody in dealing with evidence,
at every level of the investigation.

The investigation processes in the HDFI process model is
brieﬂy discussed below, while a more detailed description of
the HDFI process model can be found in Alexander and Venter
[18][1].

i Incident Detection Process: This is one of the initialisation
process class of the HDFI process model. This occurs when
an incident is discovered, and investigation is initiated for
ﬁndings [1]. The incident detection mechanism could be in
the form of intrusion detection in a network, log-analysis
and human ﬁndings.

ii First Response Process: This is also an initialisation pro-
cess class of the HDFI process model. It deals with the
ﬁrst awareness of an incident, acknowledging the incident
and starting the process by involving the stakeholders.
This can be achieved by a system or an individual and
involves further reporting to the system administrator or
the stakeholders or investigator.

iii Planning Process: This process is the planning of the
needed techniques, human resources and tools to carry out
a investigation successfully. The incident detection and the
ﬁrst response phases are the impetus to begin the planning
process.

iv Preparation Process: This involves the preparing of all the
necessary equipment, tools, resources and training needed
to perform a digital forensic investigation process.

v Incident Scene Documentation Process: This is a pro-
cess that occurs at
the incident scene location. In the
harmonised digital forensic investigation process model,
the incident scene documentation is important as some
cases are escalated from one investigator to another as the
investigation proceeds. This is because the ﬁrst respondent
in most cases is not always the investigator of a case, there-
fore the documentation of the scene of the incident should
be clear and precise to promote easy hand-over, maintain
chain of custody, evidence preservation and continuity
in an investigation process. Proper documentation should
involve the clear labelling of the evidence, photographs and
video coverage recording of the scene, taking every scene
at it appear on ﬁrst contact. This is to effectively preserve
the chain of custody as the investigation continues.

vi Potential Digital Evidence Identiﬁcation Process: The ev-
idence in the case for investigation is properly identiﬁed,

and labeled distinctively with name and non-identical serial
number attached to every item identiﬁed at the scene. This
is for easy identiﬁcation and recognition, especially when
there is more than one device found at the scene.

vii Digital Evidence Collection Process: This applies after the
identiﬁcation of the evidence, when collection is necessary
for further analysis. During collection the integrity of the
evidence must be preserved to enable making a formal
conclusion later. The evidence collection procedures, appli-
cable to a device such as a mobile phone, may be different
from other branches of forensics like network forensics,
live forensics or dead forensics.

viii Digital Evidence Transportation Process: This involves the
movement of the evidence from one location to another for
the purpose of further analysis. The transportation method
chosen must adhere to the preservation of the chain of
custody taking into account the volatile nature of the data
and device in question.

ix Digital Evidence Storage Process: The storage occurs when
the potential evidence cannot be analysed immediately.
While being stored, the preservation of the integrity of the
evidence as well as the chain of custody must be observed.
x Digital Evidence Analysis Process: The evidence analysis
is one the investigative processes in the process class
of the harmonised digital forensic investigation process
model, where the hypothesis of the case under investigation
is identiﬁed. There are several
techniques that can be
applied for evidence analysis, but these techniques must be
forensically sound. An attempt is made to set the scene, by
re-constructing the scene and implement a mechanism to
solve the puzzle of the case. Since evidence analysis holds
a great importance to the investigation, it must be accorded
due diligence. The need for fairness and professionalism
must be observed.

xi Digital Evidence Interpretation Process: The analysed dig-
ital evidence needs to be interpreted based on the infor-
mation accumulated in the case under investigation. The
interpretation of digital evidence is essential to enable the
investigator sort the importance pieces of evidence in a
hierarchical form. The most important piece of evidence
is analysed at the beginning and the least signiﬁcant at
the end. This separation is necessary in drawing up a
conclusion to the ﬁndings. However, in all case, there
is the need to apply scientiﬁcally proved methods during
interpretation of analysed evidence.

xii Report Writing Process: Reporting the investigation ﬁnd-
ings can be in the form of an expert witness’s testimony,
presentation and interpretation to the stakeholders for fur-
ther hypothesis development, or as an input to another
inquiry. Reports should list all evidence examined in the
order of importance to the processed case. Furthermore,
the reporting language must be clear and understandable to
all stakeholders involved which can something include, the
jury, the accused and the legal counsel. The report should
be preserved for a reasonable amount of time for future
reference and decision making.

xiii Presentation Process: The presentation of digital forensic
ﬁndings may be in the form of a multimedia presenta-
tion, documented account or expert witness’s testimony. It
should be simple, precise and communicate the message
effectively. The presentation of evidence found during an
investigation, must include the photograph of the scene, the

timestamp and date of the incident and should be presented
with all the stakeholders present. According to Cohen[17],
the evidence presentation process is one of the most
signiﬁcant sub process of the digital forensic investigation.
This is so, because the use of language by the investigator
or the presenter, may determine the admissibility of the
evidence in court. Cohen further states that there is the
need to identify experts’ opinion/testimony and what the
forensic evidence portray. The expert’s testimony is crucial
as well as the presentation technique [17].

xiv Investigation Conclusion Process: The investigation closes
after the presentation. However, a decision should be made
as regards the evidence storage. The interactive nature of
the HDFI process model allows the investigator to re-visit
the sub processes of the of the HDFI process model for
further examination, especially when there is need for a
new input, that could further enhance the case even at
case closure when there is need to challenge the hypothesis
applied to validate/back-up the ﬁndings. The decision as to
what to do with the evidence is made and the case closed.

III. METHODOLOGY APPLIED

The testing of the HDFI process model was conducted with
commercial mobile forensics software of the Micro System-
ation (MSAB) XRY V6.5 Mobile Forensic tool kit [12] at the
digital forensic laboratory of Risk Diversion Pty Ltd., in the
Computer Science Department, University of Pretoria, South
Africa. Those involved in the testing of the HDFI process
model applied the steps in the order described above. The
scenario employed in this testing of the HDFI process model
constitutes a real case. However, due to the conﬁdentiality
agreement in place between the researcher and Risk Diversion,
the scenario described in this paper has some details of the
case withheld or rendered anonymous. It concentrates on the
application of the HDFI process model to mobile devices using
an Android mobile device as our case study.

IV. CASE SCENARIO

The case that this paper examined is the suspicion of a
phishing attack using scareware, targeted at bank X customers
via short message services (SMS). A scareware is a form of
malicious software (malware) developed with the intention
to scare the user and lure them to a phishing website for
subsequent attacks. A phishing attack is a malware used to get
details of individuals or organisations for further security ex-
ploitation and subsequent attacks [7]. The mobile device with
the SMS scare ware is a Samsung mobile Galaxy S2 phone
belonging to the customer X of bank X. The suspect/attacker
distributes scareware to bank X clients via a SMS.

The suspect/attacker sent scareware SMSs to the clients,
mimicking Bank X by requesting the clients to click on the sent
link to update their account details or else lose their database
with the bank. The unsuspecting Bank X customer clicked on
the link and eventually fell victim to a phishing attack. The
suspect further performed an unauthorised transaction on the
customer’s bank account as a result of the bank X customer
details collected. A transaction’s alert received by the bank’s
customer that he/she never initiated raised the customer’s
suspicion, the customer then reported the incident to bank X.

V. TESTING THE HARMONISED DIGITAL

FORENSICS INVESTIGATION PROCESS MODEL

The investigators applied the HDFI process model through-
out the investigation. The HDFI process model is tested using
the Android mobile phone by applying the HDFI process
model step by step as listed above. This paper uses the term
nvestigatoro imply the digital forensic investigator involved in
conducting the investigation of this case study at each sub
process of the HDFI process model. The investigators observed
the chain of custody, with proper documentation in all the
HDFI sub processes and these are each discussed in detail in
the sections to follow.

A. Incident Detection Process

In applying the incident detection process on the case
presented, the bank X customer detected the incident when
s/he received the SMS. The customer reported the subsequent
debit transaction that occurred in her/his account to the bank
X manager since the transaction never originated from the
customer. The customer also noted that
this unauthorised
transaction occurred after the update of the account details
as requested by the suspect, who is mimicking the bank. The
customer X also reported the incident of the scareware.

B. First Response Process

The ﬁrst responder of this case is the bank X manager. This
occurred when the customer reported the scareware incident
to the bank. The bank manager subsequently secured and
preserved the evidence, that is, the mobile device with the
scareware messages as received by the customer for further
forensic analysis. The bank manger applied the ﬂow of infor-
mation by reporting the incident to the authorities.

C. Planning Process

In planning the investigation of this incident, the investiga-
tor employed a parallel action by getting authorization from the
mobile network provider, to obtain the mobile phone activity
history of customer X. The investigator documented all that
was necessary in planning for all the needed equipment to
achieve the goal of retracing the SMS. The mobile network
provider had to be contacted to assist in the location of the
sender of the SMS as well.

D. Preparation Process

In the preparation process, the needed equipment was, the
XRY complete toolkit for mobile device examinations, a XRY
license key USB stick, a write blocker, a forensically cleaned
USB drive, a Dell Desktop PC with Windows OS 8, a SIM
adapter, a forensically cleaned hard drive and empty DVD [12].
Authorization was obtained for the call and SMS logs as well
as the data bundle history from the mobile service provider.
This assisted the examination of the evidence collected during
analysis by comparing the details of the SMS received (from
the suspect), the suspect’s phishing website details and the
mobile activity history to be used in the analysis process
following later.

E. Incident Scene Documentation

The investigator provided the documentation from inter-
viewing the ﬁrst respondent and photographed the evidence
with the timestamp, type and size of the device, at the incident
scene detection. This preserved the evidence and chain of
custody [17].

F. Potential Digital Evidence Identiﬁcation Process

The investigator that responded to the incident ﬁrst, iden-
tiﬁed the potential evidence as the mobile phone. The in-
vestigator handed in the device to the laboratory with the
documentation of the identiﬁed evidence after the collection
and transportation. At the laboratory, the receiving investigator
identiﬁed the mobile phone as the crucial evidence, specifying
and documenting the serial number (MER7823e83), device
name (Samsung) and device model (S2). The device was
then photographed and documented. The mobile phone were
booked by signing a custody release and received form.

G. Digital Evidence Collection Process

In some cases the evidence collection process requires the
logical and physical form of data extraction, but in this case
the logical data extraction technique produced the necessary
evidence. The SMS, call and browser history contained the
evidence which was located in the storage compartments of the
mobile phone. The evidence was collected using a commercial
product that is used for mobile forensic data extraction. After
extraction, a search was made through the entire data extracted
using the provided keywords. The information deduced was
compared to the browser history; call log, and time stamp with
the call log and SMS history provided by the mobile phone
network service provider. The investigating ofﬁcer documented
the process that s/he applied, which were in line with a
forensically sound collection process. A forensically sound
data collection refers to the action when all necessary caution
is applied to preserve the potential evidence, including the
preservation of its integrity. The mobile phone was sealed
in a faraday bag. A faraday bag is an interference-blocking
container that can eliminate any possible interference from the
mobile phone network service provider and it also protects the
mobile phone from remote accessing or wiping.

H. Digital Evidence Transportation Process

The investigator transported the evidence to the laboratory
in a forensically sound condition, preserving the integrity of
the evidence. The investigator preserved the evidence integrity
of the mobile device by turning off the phone and placing it
in a faraday bag for transportation to the laboratory.

I. Digital Evidence Storage Process

Evidence can be stored when analysis may not occur
immediately after transportation to the laboratory location.
However, mobile phones are volatile and need analysis as
quickly as possible [21]. However, in this case study, the poten-
tial evidence was not stored, rather the analysis of the evidence
commenced immediately, since all the needed equipment were
already in place and authorization had been granted. This case
study was accorded high priority as it involved bank customers,
bank’s integrity and ﬁnance.

J. Digital Evidence Analysis Process

In the analysis of the android mobile phone, the logical
extraction technique is applied. The choice of logical extraction
was made based on the location of evidence required for the
investigation, that is, the SMS, call logs and calendar events
on the device. The extraction of the information was done in
three different stages. Firstly, with the phone still turned off,
it is then connected to the PC via the XRY USB cable. This
is a special USB cable in the XRY tool kit that is speciﬁcally
designed for logical extraction. In the XRY tool kit, there is a
USB cable for most mobile devices available today. It allows
for the extraction of data from the mobile phone’s various
storage locations and then place the. In this investigation the
extracted data is stored on a forensically cleaned hard drive and
a ’forensic master’ copy is made. The forensic master copy was
then kept aside and a mirror of the master copy is used as the
working copy for the analysis. A cryptographic hash message
digest (MD5) was used to further preserve data integrity and
consistency with the original evidence. The copies made are
used so that the original evidence is handled as little as possible
in order to minimise the risk of contaminating the original
evidence.

However, not all the required data is extracted while the
device is turned off, therefore, a second search was made on
each of the storage locations of the mobile phone, namely the
SIM, eMMC, and the SD card, when the device was turned on.
To achieve this, the SIM card was removed, and then cloned
with a ’dummy’ SIM card. The cloned SIM is used when
the device is turned on. This is done such that the cloned
SIM mimics the original network service provider’s SIM, the
difference being the inability of the cloned SIM to receive
network communication from the mobile network provider,
there by disallowing any communication in or out from the
mobile phone to the network service provider. This is to further
preserve the evidence integrity.

Finally, the third extraction was made with the aid of the
eMMC card reader, which is part of the XRY tool kit. The
eMMC card reader was attached to the PC and this extraction
was made from the eMMC(ﬂash memory card) while separated
from the mobile phone.

K. Digital Evidence Interpretation Process

The analysed digital evidence needs to be interpreted
based on the information accumulated for the case under
investigation. In this particular case the information extracted
from the various locations was further separated by sorting
and selecting the necessary information, such as the SMS,
URL browser details of the Samsung S2 mobile phone around
the time the scare ware was send until after the unauthorised
bank transaction took place. The interpretation of the digital
evidence is essential to enable the investigator to sort the
importance of evidence in a hierarchical form by placing
the most
the top and the
least signiﬁcant at the lower position. The SMS used by the
Attackers to lure the bank customers to their phishing website,
was therefore, placed in the top position in the hierarchy of
evidence alongside the activity on the phishing website. The
extracted evidence was interpreted with the aid of timestamp,
the SMS tracker agent and the GPS location view. The SMS

important piece of evidence at

tracker is an external software tool used to track SMSs back
to its origin. In this investigation, this option was applied with
authorisation. The URL included in the SMS by the attacker,
also pointing to the phishing websites, helped narrow down
the search in apprehending the attackers. It was this evidence
interpretation sub process that led to drawing up a conclusion
to the ﬁndings.

L. Report Writing Process

Reporting is the process of providing a detailed summary
the steps taken to reach a conclusion of the case
of all
investigated. In the reporting, the detailed processes applied
during the investigation are explained in simple language, that
is understood by all the stakeholders. The stakeholders in this
case, are the physical investigation team, the bank ofﬁcers,
the bank client and the legal parties. The ﬁrst documentation
was received from the incident detection sub process with the
attached photographs taken at the incident scene. Processes
that enhance the authenticity of the investigation such as the
evidence handling forms, stating who did what, and how it
was done at each stage of the investigation were also included
in the report of the ﬁndings. The results of the XRY mobile
forensics tool kit used was documented and reported and how
the extracted potential evidence was sorted using the keywords.
Finally, the investigation team presented all this documented
evidence collected from the mobile device to the stakeholders.
This included the data attributed to the device as obtained
from the mobile phone’s network service provider and the data
obtained from the device, during the evidence sorting.

M. Presentation Process

The investigator presented the sorted evidence, in the order
of priority and relevance to the case, along with the written
report, to the stakeholders. This presentation is also based
on the report given in the reporting sub process above. This
written presentation was simple and understandable to the
stakeholders. This investigation attempted to identify the case
of scareware to bank X customers. The information retrieved
was details of call history with calls made, received and
missed, and SMSs received, sent and deleted. Addresses on
the phone contact list and the mobile phone’s own number
was also found.

The interpretation of the URL and the location of the
GPS of the mobile device of the receiver (Customer X) from
the sender (the Attacker) further assisted the investigation in
ﬁnding the location of the perpetrator of the act of spamming
the bank X customers and identiﬁed the location of the
Attacker. The history of the internet browser of the attacker
revealed several attempts to access several bank account details
belonging to random victims that had received SMSs from the
suspect.

At the analysis of the information found in the mobile
phone listed above,
it was found to be consistent with a
scareware sent via SMS to the customer of bank X who had
reported the unauthorised transaction in his/her account [7].

N. Investigation Conclusion Process

The conclusion process occurred after the presentation
of the ﬁndings to the stakeholders. The mobile phone was

returned to the customer of bank X. The evidence and in-
formation found by the investigators, was sufﬁcient for the
investigation team to prosecute the scareware suspects and
remand them in custody.

O. The Concurrent Processes

The concurrent processes are the processes of activities
that are applied throughout the investigation process such as,
obtaining authorization which occurred in order to get the
mobile network to provide the phone details and history of
the suspect. Documentation is also an essential aspect of the
concurrent processes, and this was done from the ﬁrst response
to the case closure. The documentation of the processes of
investigation is necessary to preserve information ﬂow. The
chain of custody was observed during the sign-off, or at the
returning of the evidence, which was the mobile device. There
was constant interaction among the investigators for updates
on the case.

VI.

FINDINGS AND OBSERVATIONS

In the HDFI process model, the potential evidence iden-
tiﬁcation and potential evidence collection can be in the
physical or logical form. The potential evidence identiﬁcation
and collection phase of this investigation was achieved in the
logical form. This is because all the evidence needed in a
mobile device is stored within the mobile device’s storage
units such as the SD card, SIM card and the phone’s hardware
memory [18]. However, in the application of the HDFI process
model to mobile forensics, the identiﬁcation of evidence is not
physically visible but rather the logical accessing of the device
to identify potential evidence [5]. One of the observations
of this paper concerns the transportation mechanism of the
evidence. The movement of a mobile phone from incident
scene to a location for further analysis is a crucial aspect of
the investigation, and if not handled with optimum care, may
render the entire investigation invalid. However, in the test
carried out, the transportation of the potential evidence was
done in a forensically sound condition.

This paper ﬁnds the incident scene documentation as a very
important phase of the harmonised digital forensics investi-
gation process model for all devices, especially for mobile
devices where more than one investigator are involved [19].
During this investigation, there was need to hand over the
investigation to another investigator. With a well documented
chain of custody and hand over notes, written in clear and
understandable language for easy continuity, the HDFI process
model
that has adequately accommodated the
investigation of an Android mobile phone. However, as earlier
stated, there are various versions of Android devices and the
Mobile industry is experiencing great economic growth there-
fore, changes that may occur in future is not accommodated
in this test, rather the current state of the device used, is
implemented[3][6].

is a model

During this investigation, one of the ﬁndings made is
that each sub process of the HDFI process model are inputs
to the other sub processes. However, for each sub process
to link successfully to the next sub process, requires the
full application of the concurrent activities. These are the
aspects of the HDFI process model,
that further harness

the inclusion of mobile phones in the model and also the
integrity of the investigations. The most critical element of
these concurrent activities is the documentation process, which
forms the coherency between all the sub processes. Good
documentation which is passed on from one stage to the next
is essential in maintaining information ﬂow and ensuring that
the chain of custody is adequately observed. Otherwise there
is the danger of potential evidence contamination. Mobile
phones are volatile and a change in content information by an
intruder may not be quickly noticed. However, with the chain
of custody, evidence preservation and the sign-off on every
document at every level of the investigation implemented, this
activity is deterred. In this testing, the documentation was
handled with utmost caution and information ﬂow was adhered
to. In mobile forensic investigations, a break in information
ﬂow, documentation, evidence handling or chain of custody
can render a case inconclusive or invalid when presented to
stakeholders.

Another positive strength of the HDFI process model is
the ability of the investigation process to continue at any
sub process, since there is adequate documentation at all sub
processes. In this investigation, the use of documentation was
observed from the ﬁrst responder to the closure of the case.
The poor information delivered by customer X to bank X staff,
proved a little tedious to process. However, with the mobile
device that received the SMS available and the message intact,
along with the documentation of the mobile phone activity
as presented by the mobile network service provider to the
investigators, this challenge was overcome.

there is one potential difﬁculty,

While the HDFI process model does work well for an
in that it
Android phone,
needs the total co-operation and understanding between the
different personnel involved in the investigation. In most cases
the investigating team is comprised of different professionals
with varying roles and expertise. For example, in this case
study the ﬁrst responder was a bank manager, who passed
the investigation over to a law enforcement agent, who in
turn passed it over to an IT professional who conducted the
test. The IT professional then documented and presented the
ﬁndings to the various stakeholders. Because of all the various
personnel involved there is the potential for the investigation
to breakdown in the handover between them. It is due this
potential ﬂaw, that this paper has continually emphasised the
importance of proper documentation that is easily understood
by professionals from different ﬁelds. With proper documen-
tation at all sub processes in the HDFI process model, this
potential ﬂaw can be prevented from being actualised.

The testing of the HDFI process model was carried out
using an android mobile phone following the described pro-
cesses above, and in the opinion of this paper, the investigation
shows that the HDFI process model successfully incorporated
an Android mobile phone with no major difﬁculty. This paper,
therefore, claims that the HDFI process model accommodates
the investigation of Android devices, and therefore mobile
devices in general, effectively, as long as the concurrent
processes are strictly implemented from the beginning of an
investigation to its conclusion.

[10] Bunge, Mario Augusto (1998) Philosophy of science (Science and
Technology Studies)) publisher: Springer-Verlag. ISBN 0-7658-0415-8
(set: pbk. : alk. paper).-ISBN 0-7658-0413-1 Fifth printing 2009 Rev.
ed. of: Scientiﬁc research. Berlin, New York:

[11] Andrew Hoog(2011) Android Forensics Investigation, Analysis, and
Mobile Security for Google Android published by Syngress is an imprint
of Elsevier 225 Wyman Street, Waltham, MA 02451, USA ISBN: 978-
1-59749-651-3

[12] Micro Systemation (MSAB) XRY emph http://www.msab.com
[13] Derrick G. Kourie, Bruce W. Watson (2012) The Correctness-by-
Construction Approach to Programming Springer Heidelberg Dordrecht
London New York, Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, 2012

[14] Clements, Paul Felix Bachmann, Len Bass, David Garlan, James Ivers,
Reed Little, Paulo Merson, Robert Nord, Judith Stafford (2010). Doc-
umenting Software Architectures: Views and Beyond, Second Edition.
Boston: Addison-Wesley, 2010

[15] Marwan AlZarouni (2006) A Mobile Handset Forensic Evidence: a
Challenge for Law enforcement Australian Digital Forensic Conference
Security Research Institute Conference, October, 2006

[16] Google Projects for Android. code.google.com. Google Inc. 2011.
[17] Dr. Fred Cohen (2009) Digital Forensic Evidence Examination Pub-
lisher: Fred Cohen and Associates out of Livermore 2009 3rd Edition,
ISBN-10: 1878109448 — ISBN-13: 978-1878109446

[18] Aleksandar V, Venter H. S (2012) Harmonised Digital Forensic Inves-

tigation Process Model IEEE Conference Publications

[19] Karie, N. M, Venter H. S (2013) Towards a General Ontology for
Digital Forensic Disciplines Journal of Forensic Sciences, 2013( In
Press)

[20] Wayne Jansen, Rick Ayers

(2007) Guidelines on Cell Phone
Forensics Recommendations of the National Institute of Standards
and Technology-Computer Security Division, Information Technology
Laboratory National Institute of Standards and Technology(NIST),
Gaithersburg, MD 20899-8930, May, 2007

[21] Salvatore Fiorillo (2009) Information Security Consultant Theory and
practice of ﬂash memory mobile forensics Australian Digital Forensics
Conference Security Research Institute ConferencesEdith Cowan Uni-
versity, 2009

VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK

The HDFI process model adequately accommodated the
Android mobile phone in this testing, however, there is need
to adhere to the concurrent processes such as documentation,
preservation of chain of custody, preservation of evidence and
obtaining authorization. As with any organisational policy, the
overall policy is usually at a high level, thereby allowing
the use of procedures and standards to interpret
them in
more descriptive forms[8]. There is a need for further in-
depth analysis of each sub processes of the HDFI process
model with a detailed procedure of how a sub-process can
be applied to accomplish a digital forensics investigative task.
This description can be in the form of procedures or standards
with detailed processes generated from the HDFI process
model. For further study therefore, there is need to evaluate
each of the sub processes to come up with a standardised step
by step procedure that can be applied in various ﬁelds of digital
forensic science.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

The authors wish to thank the digital forensics team of
Risk Diversion Pty (LTD) for the collaboration with the ICSA
research group at the University of Pretoria. Furthermore, we
would like to thank them for allowing the use of their equip-
ment during the testing scenarios of the HDFI process model
with various devices as mentioned above, and in particular
giving us full access to the Macro systematic XRY mobile
forensics toolkit during the Android mobile phone testing.

REFERENCES

[1]

http://www.iso27001security.com/html/27043.html ISO/IEC 27034 In-
formation technology Security techniques Application security (part
1 published, rest in DRAFT)

[2] Brian J.S. Che, Curtis Franklin, Jr.(2010) Cloud Computing Technolo-
gies and Strategies of the Ubiquitous Data Center Publication: CRC
Press Taylor Francis Group 6000 Broken Sound Parkway NW, Suite
300 Boca Raton, FL 33487-2742. International Standard Book Number:
978-1-4398-0612-8
Jenny C. A, Isaac M. M (2007) Mobile Phones and Economic De-
velopment in Africa Journal of Economic Perspectives businessinnova-
tion.berkeley.edu/Mobile Impact/Aker-Mbiti mobileph

[3]

[4] Gordon E. Moore(1965) Cramming more components onto integrated
circuits with unit cost falling as the number of components per circuit
rises, by 1975 economics may dictate squeezing as many as 65,000
components on a single silicon chip Electronics, Volume 38, Number
8, April 19, 1965

[5] Andrew Hoog, Katie Strzempka(2011) iPhone and iOS Forensics In-
vestigation, Analysis and Mobile Security for Apple iPhone, iPad, and
iOS Devices Syngress ISBN: 978-1-59749-659-9

[6] What is the Impact of Mobile Telephony on Economic Growth - a

Report for the GSM Association

[7] Michael Sikorski, Andrew Honig( 2012) PRACTICAL MALWARE
ANALYSIS - The Hands-On Guide to Dissecting Malicious Software
William Pollock , ISBN-10: 1-59327-290-1, ISBN-13: 978-1-59327-
290-6 San Francisco, CA 94103

[8] Michael E.W, Herbert J.M (2009) Management of Information Security
3rd edition Course Technology, Boston, M 02210, USA. ISBN-13: 978-
0-8400-3160-0, 10: 0-8400-3160-2

[9] Wayne Jansen, Rick Ayers(May 2007) Guidelines on Cell Phone
Forensics Recommendations of the National Institute of Standards and
Technology NIST Special Publication 800-101, National Institute of
Standards and Technology - Computer Security Division Information
Technology Laboratory, U.S. Department of Commerce, May 2007

