Towards a Digital Forensic Readiness Framework  

for Public Key Infrastructure Systems 

Aleksandar Valjarevic,   

Department of Computer Science 

University of Pretoria, 
Pretoria, South Africa 

alexander@vlatacom.com 

 
 

[2][3].  A 

in  relation 

to  computer  crime 

Abstract— 
 
The  Public  Key  Infrastructure  (PKI)  is  a  set  of  hardware, 
software,  people,  policies,  and  procedures  needed  to  create, 
manage, store, distribute, and revoke digital certificates [18]. PKI 
systems are today one of the most accepted and used technologies 
to  enable  successful  implementation  of  information  systems 
security services such as authentication and confidentiality.  
 
Digital forensics is a branch of forensic science encompassing the 
recovery  and  investigation  of  material  found  in  digital  devices, 
often 
forensic 
investigation of digital evidence is commonly employed as a post-
event response to a serious information security incident. In fact, 
there are many circumstances where an organization may benefit 
from an ability to gather and preserve digital evidence before an 
incident  occurs.  Digital 
enables  an 
organization  to  maximize  its  potential  to  use  digital  evidence 
whilst minimizing the costs of an investigation [7]. 
 
The problem that this paper addresses is that there is no Digital 
Forensic  Readiness  Framework  for  PKI  systems,  thus  not 
enabling  an 
implementation  of  Digital  Forensic  Readiness 
measures  to  PKI  systems.  This  paper  focuses  on  defining  the 
basic postulates of a Digital Forensic Readiness Framework for 
PKI  systems.  The  authors  investigate  a  model  that  can  be 
proposed to accomplish this and also certain policies, guidelines 
and  procedures  which  can  be  followed.  When  proposing  the 
framework  the  authors  take  into  account  requirements  for 
preserving  or 
information  security  and  not  to 
interfere with the existing PKI systems’ business processes. 

forensic 

readiness 

improving 

 
Keywords: 

Infrastructure, Digital Forensic Readiness. 

information 

systems 

security,  Public  Key 

I. 

 INTRODUCTION 

important  method  of 

Over the past few years, digital forensics has risen to the fore as an 
increasingly 
identifying  and  prosecuting 
computer  criminals  and  implementing  investigations  relating  to 
computer crime, data corruption, data recovery, system crashes and 
all other incidents requiring investigation as defined by policies of the 
information system owner [1]. 
 

Vlatacom South Africa Pty Ltd 

Vlatacom d.o.o 

 

 

HS Venter, 

Department of Computer Science 

University of Pretoria, 
Pretoria, South Africa 
hventer@cs.up.ac.za 

 

solutions, 

electronic  documents 

The Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) is a set of hardware, software, 
people,  policies,  and  procedures  needed  to  create,  manage,  store, 
distribute,  and  revoke  digital  certificates  [18].  PKI  systems  today 
present  one  of  the  most  accepted  and  used  technologies  to  enable 
successful  implementation  of  information  systems  security  services 
such  as  authentication  and  confidentiality.  These  systems  are  of 
extreme importance for e-Government implementations, e-Commerce 
implementations, 
electronic 
transactions solutions, secure e-mail solutions and other information 
systems  implementations  that  require  strong  authentication  and 
encryption. 
 
It  is  with  this  in  mind  that  authors  defined  the  following  problem 
statement. The problem is that, currently, there is no Digital Forensic 
Readiness (DFR) Framework for PKI systems, thus not enabling an 
implementation  of  Digital  Forensic  Readiness  measures  to  PKI 
systems. 
 
The authors have defined the concept of a DFR Framework for PKI 
systems  as  follows.  A  DFR  Framework  for  PKI  systems  is  set  of 
recommended concepts, values and practices that constitute the way 
DFR  should  be  implemented  to  PKI  systems.  The  proposed 
framework includes a model and set of guidelines and procedures to 
be followed when implementing DFR for PKI systems. The authors 
see the DFR model for PKI systems as schematic representation of 
the process to be followed when implementing DFR for PKI systems. 
 
The  paper  is  structured  as  follows.  The  first  section  introduces  the 
paper  and  provides  the  problem  statement.  Section  II  gives  an 
overview of past work on Digital Forensic Readiness and Public Key 
Infrastructure, setting the background for this work. The next section 
explains  a  proposed  Digital  Forensic  Readiness  Framework  for 
Public  Key  Infrastructure  systems.  Section  IV  concentrates  on 
discussing  the  proposed  framework.  The  last  section concludes this 
paper and indicates possible future work.   

II.  BACKGROUND 

This  section  gives  an  overview  of  past  work  on  Digital  Forensic 
Readiness  and  Public  Key  Infrastructure  systems.  We  cover  basic 
principles and models proposed for digital forensic readiness and for 
PKI principles and architecture. 
A.  Digital Forensic Readiness 
Digital  forensics  is  a  branch  of  forensic  science  encompassing  the 
recovery and investigation of material found in digital devices, often 

 
 

 
 

in relation to, but not limited to, computer crime [2][3]. A forensic 
investigation  of  digital  evidence  is  commonly  employed  as  a  post-
event  response  to  a  serious  information  security  incident.  In  fact, 
there  are  many  circumstances  where  an  organization  may  benefit 
from  an  ability  to  gather  and  preserve  digital  evidence  before  an 
incident occurs [7]. Digital forensic readiness is defined as the ability 
of  an  organization  to  maximize  its  potential  to use  digital  evidence 
whilst minimizing the costs of an investigation [4]. 
 
What follows is a brief overview of work relating to digital forensic 
readiness. 
 
Tan [4] identified factors that affect digital forensic readiness: 

 
Yasinsac  and  Manzano  [5]  propose  six  categories  of  policies  to 
facilitate digital forensics readiness: 

how logging is done; 

 
  what is logged; 
 
 
 

Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS); 
forensic acquisition; 
evidence handling. 

retaining information; 
 
  planning the response; 
 
 
  preventing anonymous activities; 
  protecting the evidence. 

training; 
accelerating the investigation; 

 
Wolfe-Wilson and Wolfe [6] emphasize the need for an organization 
to have procedures in place in order to preserve digital evidence in 
the event that DFI is needed.  
 
Rowlingson [7] defines digital forensic readiness goals as: 

 

 

 

 

 

legally  and  without 

To  gather  admissible  evidence 
interfering with business  processes; 
To  gather  evidence  targeting  the  potential  crimes  and 
disputes that may adversely impact an organization; 
To allow an investigation to proceed at a cost in proportion 
to the incident;  
 To  minimize  interruption  to  the  business  from  any 
investigation; 
To  ensure  that  evidence  makes  a  positive  impact  on  the 
outcome of any legal action. 

 
Rowlingson  [7]  also  defines  key  activities  in  implementation  of 
digital forensic readiness: 

  Define the business scenarios that require digital evidence; 
 
Identify  available  sources  and  different  types  of  potential 
evidence; 

  Determine the evidence collection requirement; 
  Establish  a  capability  for  securely  gathering 

admissible evidence to meet the requirement; 

legally 

  Establish  a  policy  for  secure  storage  and  handling  of 

potential evidence; 

incidents; 

  Ensure  monitoring  is  targeted  to  detect  and  deter  major 

  Specify  circumstances  when  escalation  to  a  full  formal 
investigation  (which  may  use  the  digital  evidence)  should 
be launched; 

  Train staff in incident awareness, so that all those involved 
understand their role in the digital evidence process and the 
legal sensitivities of evidence. 

  Document  an  evidence-based  case  describing  the  incident 

  Ensure  legal  review  to  facilitate  action  in  response  to  the 

and its impact; 

incident. 

 
Since  the  first  Digital  Forensic  Research  Workshop  (DFRWS)  in 
2001 [11], the need for a standard framework for digital forensics has 
been acknowledged by the information security society.  
 
A framework for digital forensics needs to be flexible enough so that 
it  can  support  future  technologies  and  different  types  of  incidents. 
Therefore, it needs to be simple and abstract. On the other hand, if it 
is  too  simple  and  abstract  then  it  is  difficult  to  create  tool 
requirements and test procedures for each phase [12].  
 
There  are  several  works  presenting  digital  forensic  models,  which 
include  readiness  as  a  phase.  These  are  briefly  mentioned  below. 
Note that in this paper, however, the words framework and model are 
used with the following relation. The framework can contain a model, 
but also other components proposed by this paper, such as policies, 
guidelines and procedures. 
 
Carrier  and  Spafford  [8]  proposed  a  digital  investigation  process 
model, which has 17 phases, divided in five groups, one group being 
readiness phases. The group contains two phases: operation readiness 
phase and infrastructure readiness phase. . 
 
Mandia,  Prosise,  and  Pepe  [9]  also  proposed  a  digital  investigation 
process  that  includes  a  readiness  phase,  known  as  the  pre-incident 
preparation phase. 
 
Beebe  and  Clark  [10]  proposed  the  Hierarchical,  Objectives-Based 
Framework  for  the  Digital  Investigations  Process,  which  includes  a 
preparation  phase.  Beebe  and  Clark  equate  preparation  phase  with 
achieving digital forensic readiness. They also gave a comparison of 
different  digital  forensic  models,  where  only  the  models  of  Carrier 
and  Spafford  [8]  and  Mandia,  Prosise  and  Pepe  [9]  included  a 
preparation  phase.  Preparation  phases  mentioned  here  include 
activities that are required to achieve digital forensic readiness.  
 
Although Rowlingson [8] has not defined a digital forensic readiness 
model, based on his work such model can also be defined.  
 
The next subsection gives a brief overview of PKI principles. 
B.  Public Key Infrastructure 
The major strength of public key encryption is its ability to facilitate 
communication  between  parties  previously  unknown  to  each  other. 
This is made possible by the PKI hierarchy of trust relationships [13]. 
 
Public  key  cryptography  (also  called  “two  key”  or  “asymmetric” 
cryptography)  was  invented  by  Diffie  and  Hellmann  1976  [14]. 
Unlike secret key (also called “symmetric”) cryptography, in which 
the same key is shared between two parties, pairs of corresponding 
private and public keys for each user allow the unique realization of 
some operations.  
 
PKI  derives  its  name  from  Public  Key  Cryptography.  However,  in 
practice, PKI represents the integration of public key cryptography, 
which is used for key management, digital signatures and rarely for 
encryption  (i.e.  for  encryption  of  e-mails),  and  symmetric  key 
cryptography, which is used only for encryption. (Note: secret keys 
used for encryption are exchanged using public key cryptography.) 
 

 

 
 

The  basic  PKI  architecture  model  has  remained  largely  unchanged 
since  it  was  first  published  in  the  original  Internet  Certificate  and 
Certificate Revocation List (CRL) Profile [RFC2459][16]. The latest 
model  is  reflected  in  the  most  recent  version  of  the  Internet 
Certificate and Certificate Revocation List (CRL) Profile [RFC5280] 
[17].  
 
Following  is  a  simplified  view  of  the  architectural  model  for  the 
Public-Key Infrastructure as specified in the X.509 digital certificate 
specifications standard [17]. The components in this model are: 

  End Entity: user of PKI certificates and/or end user system 

that is the subject of a certificate; 

  CA:    A  Certification  Authority  is  an  entity  which  issues 
digital  certificates  and  can  perform  digital  certificate 
management functions; 

  RA:    Registration  Authority,  i.e.  an  optional  system  to 

which a CA delegates certain management functions; 

  CRL  issuer:  a  system  that  generates  and  signs  Certificate 
Revocation  Lists  (CRLs).  CRLs  contain  data  about  all 
digital  certificates  that  have  been  revoked  due  to  loss, 
expiry etc. by a CA. These lists are published periodically 
and are used to verify the validity of digital certificates; 

  Repository:  a  system  or  collection  of  distributed  systems 
that stores certificates and CRLs and serves as a means of 
distributing these certificates and CRLs to end entities. 

 
As seen in Section I the authors defined the PKI systems as a set of 
hardware,  software,  people,  policies,  and  procedures  needed  to 
create, manage, store, distribute, and revoke digital certificates [18]. 
 
Digital certificates provide communicating parties with the assurance 
that  they  are  communicating  with  people  who  truly  are  who  they 
claim to be. Digital certificates are essentially endorsed copies of an 
individual’s  public  key.  This  prevents  malicious  individuals  from 
distributing  false  public  keys  on  behalf  of  another  party  and  then 
convincing third parties that they are communicating with someone 
else.  Digital certificates contain specific identifying information, and 
their  construction  is  governed  by  an  international  standard—X.509 
[13].  Digital  certificates  are  used  for  the  purpose  of  digital  signing 
mechanisms and encryption mechanisms. 
 
The next section presents a proposal for a Digital Forensic Readiness 
Framework for PKI systems. 
 

III.  PROPOSING A DIGITAL FORENSIC READINESS 

FRAMEWORK FOR PKI SYSTEMS 

 
Recall  the  problem  statement,  i.e.  there  is  currently  no  Digital 
Forensic  Readiness  Framework  for  PKI  systems.  Therefore,  no 
implementation  of  Digital  Forensic  Readiness  (DFR)  measures  to 
PKI systems exists to the best of the authors' knowledge. The authors 
are proposing a framework which is explained in more detail in this 
section.  This  proposed  framework  should  give  guidance  for  the 
implementation of DFR for PKI systems. 
 
First  the authors  define  aims  and  a  general  policy  for the  proposed 
framework. Thereafter a DFR model for PKI systems is given. 
A.  Aims and policy 
The authors have defined the following aims for a DFR Framework 
for PKI systems based on previous work [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] [10] 
[11]: 

1.  To maximize the potential use of digital evidence; 

2.  To  minimize  the  costs  of  investigations  incurred  either 
directly  onto  the  PKI  system,  or  related  to  PKI  system’s 
services; 

3.  To minimize interference with and prevent interruption of 

PKI systems’ business processes; 

4.  To  preserve  or  improve  the  current  level  of  information 

systems security of PKI systems. 

 
The  authors  have  added  the  last  aim  above,  which  has  not  been 
identified in previous work: The authors firmly believe that this aim 
has to be taken into account when implementing DFR measures and 
even  more  when  proposing  this  framework.  It  is  not  viable  to only 
concentrate on efficiency of the investigation (aims 1 and 2) and non-
interference with business processes (aim 3), because having only the 
first  three  aims  could  still  leave  room  for  flaws  in  the  overall 
information  security  of  an  enterprise.  An  example  of  such  a  flaw 
could involve the following. Suppose an enterprise keeps dedicated 
access control logs. Making image copies of these logs in the event of 
a  digital  forensic  investigation  is  crucial  for  the  investigation; 
however,  creating  the  image  copies  is  often  a  time-consuming 
process. If the imaging is done on off-peak times, such as after hours, 
it would not interfere with the business processes of the enterprise. 
On the contrary, if appropriate information security measures are not 
applied to the logs themselves, such as access control and encryption 
during transmission, the logs can be exposed and in that way leave 
the logs vulnerable to compromise, leading to possible compromise 
of the entire information system. 
 
It is therefore necessary to take a more holistic approach by applying 
DFR to information systems security. The authors believe that DFR 
should be a built-in security feature and not merely an add-on.  
 
These aims are to be achieved through defining a relevant framework 
by employing a relevant model, policies, guidelines and procedures. 
The authors firstly derive a policy that must be conformed to when 
implementing  a  DFR  framework,  based  on  aims  the  authors  have. 
The following is the definition of the policy. 
 
The policy for achieving a DFR framework within PKI systems is to 
maximize the potential of using digital evidence connected to a PKI 
system,  while  minimizing  costs  of  investigations.  The  incident 
initiating  the  investigation  can  occur  within  the  PKI  system  or 
outside  of  the  PKI  system.  In  the  latter  case,  however, the incident 
has to be related to the PKI system’s services. Interference with or 
interruption  of  the  PKI  system’s  business  processes  is  not  allowed 
while  preserving  or  improving  the  current  level  of  information 
systems security over the PKI system as a whole. 
 
B.  Model 
 
Note, once more, that in this paper the words framework and model 
are used with the following meaning. The framework can contain a 
model,  but  also  other  components  proposed  by  this  paper,  such  as 
policies, guidelines and procedures. 
 
The authors have defined a model for the implementation of DFR in 
PKI systems.  The model has following phases: 

1.  Scenario definition  

2. 

(Scenario phase); 
Identification of possible sources of evidence  
(Sources phase); 

3.  Defining procedures for pre-incident collection, storage and 

manipulation with data representing possible evidence 

 

 
 

 
This  model  can  be  applied  for  digital  forensic  readiness  for  any 
information  system,  not  necessarily  for  PKI  systems  only,  as  it  is 
generic enough.  
 
In the Model phases subsection the authors explain each of the model 
phases  in  more  detail.  The  authors  also  provide  guidelines  and 
recommended  procedures  for  applying  this  model  within  PKI 
systems. 
 

1)  Model phases 

a)  Scenario phase 

In  this  phase  one  should  examine  all  scenarios  of  when  digital 
evidence might be required. 
 
Input  to  this  phase  includes  all  information  regarding  PKI  system 
architecture,  technology  used  (hardware  and  software),  policies, 
procedures and business processes. The input must also include the 
policy stated earlier for the DFR framework for PKI systems. 
 
The output of this phase includes the defined scenarios. 
 
As  a  guideline,  the  authors  recommend  including  at  least  the 
following two high-level scenarios when implementing DFR for PKI 
systems: 

 

 

Internal incident: 
An internal incident is any incident that occurs, that would 
potentially require the gathering of digital evidence within 
the PKI system. An example for this is unauthorized access 
to the PKI system. 
External incident: 
An  external  incident  is  any  incident  involving  the  PKI 
system’s services, however, the incident occurs outside of 
PKI software system. An example of an external incident is 
when  a  stolen  identity  card  containing  PKI  material,  i.e. 
digital  certificate  and  keys,  are  used  for  unauthorized 
access  to  an  information  system.  If  the  card  holder  has 
reported  the  stolen  card,  the  PKI  system  would  have 
published revocation of the digital certificate on the card in 
Certificate  Revocation  List  (CRL).  This  CRL,  however, 
could  later  be  used  as  digital  evidence  during  a  potential 
investigation of the stolen card, in order to prove innocence 
of  the  legitimate  card  holder.  It  should  be  clear  from  this 
example that the incident involved the use of PKI services, 
but  the  PKI  system  itself  was  not  compromised  by  the 
incident.  

 
The  authors  also  recommend  that  a  proper  risk  assessment  is 
performed  during  this  phase  for  each  scenario  separately.  A  risk 
assessment  would  enable  one  to  better  identify  all  possible  threats, 
vulnerabilities  and  related  scenarios 
the 
information  asset.  Based  on 
the  assessed  risk  from  certain 
threats/vulnerabilities/scenarios,  one  can,  in  later  phases,  better 
decide on the needed measures to achieve DFR, taking into account 
the  risk  level  and  the  costs  and  benefits  of  possible  measures  to 
reduce the identified risk.  

that  would  expose 

(Pre-incident collection phase); 

4.  Defining  procedures  for  pre-incident  analyses  of    data 

representing possible evidence 
(Pre-incident analyses phase); 

5.  Defining procedures for incident 

(Incident detection phase); 

6.  Defining  procedures  for  post-incident  collection,  storage 
and manipulation with data representing possible evidence 
(Post-incident collection phase); 

7.  Defining  procedures  for  post-incident  analyses  of    data 

representing possible evidence 
(Post-incident analyses phase); 

8.  Defining PKI system architecture 

9. 

(Architecture-defining phase); 
Implementing  defined  procedures  and  PKI 
architecture 
(Implementation phase); 

10.  Assessment of digital forensic readiness implementation 

system 

(Assessment phase). 

 
An  illustration  bellow  depicts  the  model  followed  by  more 
detailed discussions of each phase in the proposed model.  
 

 

Figure 1: Digital forensic readiness model for PKI systems 

As it can be seen from Figure 1, the defined model is iterative, where 
after  the  Assessment  phase  one  can  go  back  to  any  of  the  previous 
phases. 
 
Inputs and outputs to each of the phases will be defined in the Model 
phases subsection. 

 

 
 

 
The  output  of  this  phase  includes  the  defined  procedures  for  pre-
incident  collection,  storage  and  manipulation  of  data  representing 
possible evidence. 
 
In the previous phase the authors have recommended the analysis of 
some  data  sources.  In  this  phase,  however,  the  authors  recommend 
how data (possible evidence) from these sources should be collected. 
As  a  guideline  the  authors  recommend  the  following  procedures, 
regarding  data  collection,  to  be  used  when  implementing  DFR  for 
PKI systems: 

  Volatile  data  to  be  collected  periodically  and  stored  at 

central repository; 

  Device  images  to  be  collected  periodically  and  stored  at 
local  repository  if  PKI  architecture  is  decentralized, 
otherwise to be stored at central repository; 
Log files to be collected periodically and stored at central 
repository; 

 

  Digital  certificate 

life-cycle 

logs 

to  be  collected 

periodically and stored at central repository; 

  Access related logs to be collected periodically and stored 

  User life-cycle logs to be collected periodically and stored 

  Configuration files to be collected periodically and stored 

at central repository; 

at central repository; 

at central repository; 

  Certificates  to  be  collected  periodically  and  stored  at 

central repository; 

  Certificate  Revocation  Lists  to  be  collected  periodically 

and stored at central repository; 
PKI  Service  related  logs  to  be  collected  periodically  and 
stored at central repository.  

 

 
Note  that  the  collection  period  is  to  be  determined  based  on  risk 
assessment. Also note that the collection, storage and manipulation of 
data  have  to  conform  to  digital  forensic  principles  in  order  to 
preserve the chain of evidence. Lastly, note that the retention period 
of data is to be determined based on two factors: 

 
 

risk assessment; 
previous  experience,  regarding  incident  detection,  data 
quantities, network capacity and all other matters that could 
influence cost or efficiency of this phase. 

 
d)  Pre-incident analyses phase 

In this phase one should define procedures for pre-incident analyses 
of data representing possible evidence. 
 
The input to this phase includes the sources as defined in the Sources 
phase as well as the scenarios as defined in the Scenario phase. The 
input  must  also  include  the  policy  of  the  DFR  framework  for  PKI 
systems. 
 
The  output  of  this  phase  includes  the  defined  procedures  for  pre-
incident analyses of the data that represent possible evidence. 
 
As the task of data analyses is outside the scope of the functionalities 
of  PKI  systems,  the  authors  recommend  that  this  phase  defines  a 
practical interface between the PKI system and a monitoring system, 
which  would  analyze  data  in  order  to  detect  incidents.  The 
monitoring system can be a custom system that is specialized for this 
purpose. It can also be any one of the following systems: Intrusion 

   

b)  Sources phase 

In  this  phase  one  should  identify  all  possible  sources  of  evidence 
within a PKI system. 
 
Input  to  this  phase  are  all  information  regarding  the  PKI  system 
architecture,  technology  used  (hardware  and  software),  policies, 
procedures and business processes in the same way as defined in the 
previous  phase.  Input  must  also  include  the  policy  of  the  DFR 
framework for PKI systems. 
 
The output of this phase is the defined sources. 
 
As a guideline, the authors recommend to analyze the possible use of 
at  least  the  following  sources  when  implementing  DFR  for  PKI 
systems: 

volatile data; 
device images; 
log files; 
digital certificate life-cycle logs; 
access related logs; 
user life-cycle related logs; 
configuration files; 
certificates; 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Certificate Revocation Lists; 
 
 

PKI service-related logs; 
hardware security modules (HSMs).1 

 
Some of the identified possible sources as listed above might not be 
available. For example access related logging is not introduced within 
PKI  system,  which  would  mean  that  access  related  logs  are  not 
available  as  a  source  of  data.  In  that  case  measures  should  be 
explored  to  make  identified  source  available,  i.e.  introducing 
dedicated access-related logging. 
As  a  guideline,  the  authors  recommend  the  following  when 
implementing DFR for PKI systems: 

There should exist separate log files relating to access (log-
in, access to all files); 
There should exist separate user life-cycle related logs, that 
should  include  all  data  related  to  the  life-cycle  of  users 
(including OS users, application users, PKI services users); 
There  should  exist  separate  PKI  services-related  logs, 
which would be organized in such a way that one specific 
log  consists  of  all  data  relating  to  one  specific  certificate 
(certificate life-cycle, CRL lists containing this certificate, 
life-cycle of the user that is the owner of the certificate). 

 

 

 

 
 

c)  Pre-incident collection phase 

In this phase one should define procedures for pre-incident collection, 
storage and manipulation of data representing possible evidence. 
 
The  input  to  this  phase  includes  all  information  regarding  the  PKI 
system  architecture,  technology  used  (hardware  and  software), 
policies,  procedures  and  business  processes,  in  the  same  way  as 
defined in the previous phase. The input must also include the policy 
of the DFR framework for Public Key Infrastructure PKI systems. 

                                                           

1 HSM  is a secure cryptoprocessor  with funcionalities of  managing digital 
keys  and  accelerating  cryptoprocesses.  HSMs  provide  both  logical  and 
physical protection of these materials from non-authorized use and potential 
adversaries. In short, they protect high-value cryptographic keys [15]. 

 

 
 

  Certificates related to the incident to be stored at dedicated 

central repository for this incident; 

  Certificate  Revocation  Lists  related  to  the  incident  to  be 

stored at dedicated central repository for this incident; 
PKI Service related logs, related to the incident to be stored 
at dedicated central repository for this incident. 

 

 
Note that the collection of the data is to be performed when incident 
is detected.  
Also note that all previously collected data related to the incident is to 
be stored at dedicated central repository. 
Lastly  note:  Retention  period  of  data  to  be  determined  based  on 
information  security  risk  assessment,  as  same  as  based  on  previous 
experience with incident detection, data quantities, network capacity 
and  all  other  matters  that  could  influence  cost  or  efficiency  of  this 
phase. 
 

g)  Post-incident analyses phase 

 
In this phase one should define procedures for post-incident analyses 
of data representing possible evidence. 
 
Input to this phase is sources defined in Sources phase and scenarios 
defined  in  Scenario  phase.  Input  also  must  include  the  policy  of 
Digital Forensic Readiness framework for Public Key Infrastructure 
systems. 
 
Output of this phase is defined procedures for post-incident analyses 
of data representing possible evidence. 
 
As guideline the authors recommend following procedure to be used, 
when implementing Digital Forensic Readiness for PKI systems: 
During  this  phase  data  collected  in  dedicated  central  repository, 
during the previous phase should be analyzed. Based on information 
about the incident (time of incident, type of incident, affected entities, 
etc.)  and  collected  data  in  dedicated  central  repository  initial 
presentation of data should be prepared, to contain (not exclusively): 
Time-line  of  events  related  to  the  incident  (access  to  the 
system, application actions, PKI services actions); 

 

  Relation of users related to the incident; 
 

Time-line  of  all  recorded  actions  of  users  related  to  the 
incident; 

  All noted irregularities, in addition to those detected within 

the incident (hardware, software). 

 

h)  Architecture-defining phase 

In this phase one should define PKI system architecture, while taking 
into account results of all previous phases for post-incident analyses 
of data representing possible evidence. 
 
Input to this phase is results from all previous phases. Input also must 
include  the  policy  of  Digital  Forensic  Readiness  framework  for 
Public Key Infrastructure systems. 
 
Output of this phase is defined PKI system architecture. 
 
As  guideline  the  authors  recommend  analyzing  at  least  following 
matters,  when  implementing  Digital  Forensic  Readiness  for  PKI 
systems. 

Prevention  Systems,  Intrusion  Detection  Systems,  Change  Tracking 
Systems, and Log Processing Systems etc. 
 

e) 

Incident detection phase 

In this phase one should define the procedure of how an incident is 
detected. 
 
The  input  to  this  phase  includes  all  information  regarding  the  PKI 
system  architecture,  technology  used  (hardware  and  software), 
policies, procedures and business processes, similar to the procedures 
defined in both of the Pre-incident phases listed before. Further input 
must also include the policy of the DFR framework for PKI systems. 
 
The output of this phase includes the defined procedures to detect an 
incident.  
 
As the task of data analyses is outside the scope of the functionalities 
of  PKI  systems,  the  authors  recommend  that  this  phase  defines  a 
practical interface between the PKI system and a monitoring system, 
which  would  analyze  data  in  order  to  detect  incidents.  The 
monitoring system can be a custom system that is specialized for this 
purpose. It can also be any one of the following systems: Intrusion 
Prevention  Systems,  Intrusion  Detection  Systems,  Change  Tracking 
Systems, and Log Processing Systems etc. 
 

f)  Post-incident collection phase 

In  this  phase  one  should  define  procedures  for  post-incident 
collection, storage and manipulation with data representing possible 
evidence. 
 
Input  to  this  phase  are  all  information  regarding  PKI  system 
architecture,  used  technology  (hardware  and  software),  policies, 
procedures  and  business  processes,  as  same  as  sources  defined  in 
Sources phase and results from Incident detection phase. Input also 
must include the policy of Digital Forensic Readiness framework for 
Public Key Infrastructure systems. 
 
Output  of  this  phase  is  defined  procedures  for  post-incident 
collection, storage and manipulation with data representing possible 
evidence. 
 
In the sources phase above the authors have recommended analyzing 
of some data sources. In the post-incident collection phase, however, 
the  authors  recommend  how  data  (possible  evidence)  from  these 
sources should be collected. As a guideline, the authors recommend 
the following procedures, regarding data collection, to be used when 
implementing DFR for PKI systems: 

  Volatile  data  related  to  the  incident  to  be  stored  at 

dedicated central repository for this incident; 

 

  Device  images  related  to  the  incident  to  be  stored  at 

dedicated central repository for this incident; 
Log  files  related  to  the  incident  to  be  stored  at  dedicated 
central repository for this incident; 

  Digital certificate life-cycle logs related to the incident to 

be stored at dedicated central repository for this incident; 

  Access  related  logs  related  to  the  incident  to  be  stored  at 

dedicated central repository for this incident; 

  User  life-cycle logs  related  to the  incident to  be  stored at 

dedicated central repository for this incident; 

  Configuration  files  related  to  the  incident  to  be  stored  at 

dedicated central repository for this incident; 

 

 
 

j)  Assessment phase 

for  PKI  system,  which  should 

In  this  phase  one  performs  an  assessment  of  implemented  Digital 
Forensic  Readiness  for  PKI  system  and  compares  it  to  Digital 
Forensic Readiness Framework for PKI system, its aims and policy. 
 
Input  to  this  phase  are  all  information  regarding  PKI  system 
architecture,  used  technology  (hardware  and  software),  policies, 
procedures  and  business  processes,  as  same  as  results  from  all 
previous phases. 
 
Output of this phase is results of assessment of implemented Digital 
Forensic  Readiness 
include 
recommendations for changes in one or more of the previous phases. 
 
As  guideline  the  authors  recommend  analyzing  following  matters, 
when implementing Digital Forensic Readiness for PKI systems. All 
procedures,  measures  and  architectures  defined  when  implementing 
this model have to go through legal revision during Assessment phase 
in order to ensure admissibility of possible evidence in court. 
 
The  next  subsection  gives  additional  recommendations  that  are 
related  to  identity  issues.  These  recommendations  form  an  integral 
part of the proposed framework. 
 
C.  Identity related recommendations 
The  authors  highly  recommend  the  following  in  regards  to  the 
architecture of PKI systems: 

 

 

There  should  be  an  interface  to  an  automated  biometric 
identification system; 
There  should  be  an  interface  to  an  identity  management 
system; 

  Verification of identity when accessing the PKI system at 
all  levels  (OS,  application,  PKI  services)  should  be 
performed  via  multi-factor  authentication,  for  example 
requiring  biometrics,  a  digital  certificate  (except  when  a 
person applies for digital certificate) and a password. 

 
An  interface  with  an  automated  biometric  identification  system 
should  ensure  accurate  verification  of  the  identity  of  any  person 
requesting issuance of a digital certificate from a PKI system. This 
can  be  done  during  the  registration  process,  while  a  certification 
authority  (or  trusted  third  party)  is  verifying  the  identity  of  an 
applicant for a digital certificate. 
 
The  interface  with  the  identity  management  system  should  ensure 
that there is proper management of identities within the PKI system 
at all levels of access (OS, application, PKI services). One physical 
person  should  have  one  identity  (not  meaning  one  role)  within  the 
PKI system. 
 
The 
identity 
verification  should  be  used  to  set  up  access  controls  based  on  user 
roles  in  the  system.  Information  within  the  system  should  be 
classified  in  order  to  ensure  that  confidentiality  is  preserved.  Strict 
access  controls  should  exist  for  all  information  which  contains 
personal data in order to achieve desired level of privacy of the users. 
 
These  measures  would  ensure  successful  identification  of  physical 
individuals, based on information from the PKI system and systems 
interfaced with the PKI system. This would mean that the PKI system 
has higher level of digital forensics readiness.  
 

identity  management  system  and  measures  for 

 

1.  Whether 

architecture 

should 

be 

centralized 

or 

decentralized, or combined?  

Holistic approach must be taken, which would include evaluating all 
benefits  of  proposed  architecture,  from  Digital  Forensic  Readiness 
Framework  aims  fulfillment 
to  PKI  system  business  process 
efficiency. For example for environment where PKI services are to be 
provided to large number of end-entities and where those entities are 
geographically  or  logically  sparsely  distributed,  from  PKI  system 
business process efficiency standpoint it is better to have distributed 
PKI architecture. On the other side with distributed architecture issue 
of  network  capacity  and  network  costs  appears  in  relation  to 
collection,  storage  and  manipulation  with  data  identified  in  Pre-
incident  collection  and  Post-incident  collection  phases.  These  two 
standpoints  must  be  included  and  evaluated  when  making  final 
decision on PKI architecture. 

 

2.  Whether functions should be off-loaded from CA?  

This includes functions of registration, CRL list publishing and other 
functions  that  can  be  off-loaded  as  defined  by  PKIX  architecture 
model.  Holistic  approach  must  be  taken,  which  would  include 
evaluating all benefits of proposed architecture, from Digital Forensic 
Readiness  Framework  aims  fulfillment  to  PKI  system  business 
process efficiency. For example for environment where PKI services 
are to be provided to large number of end-entities, from PKI system 
business  process  efficiency  standpoint  it  is  better  to  have  as  much 
functions  as  possible  off-loaded  from  CA.  This  is  also  true  from 
information  security  standpoint,  when  one  can  isolate  CA  to  great 
extent in order to be more secure. On the other side with off-loaded 
functions, the authors have more entities within PKI architecture and 
more data to be collected and analyzed, so issue of network capacity, 
network costs and processing costs appears in relation to collection, 
storage  and  manipulation  with  data  identified  in  Pre-incident 
collection and Post-incident collection phase. These standpoints must 
be  included  and  evaluated  when  making  final  decision  on  PKI 
architecture. 
 

i) 

Implementation phase 

In this phase one implements results of all previous phases. 
 
Input  to  this  phase  is  all  information  regarding  PKI  system 
architecture,  used  technology  (hardware  and  software),  policies, 
procedures  and  results  from  all  previous  phases.  Input  also  must 
include  the  policy  of  Digital  Forensic  Readiness  framework  for 
Public Key Infrastructure systems.  
 
Output of this phase is implemented Digital Forensic Readiness for 
PKI system. 
 
As guideline the authors recommend that during this phase, one takes 
into account role of people in the PKI system. People represent end-
entities, but also custodians and owners of the system. It is important 
that all procedures include relevant information for people involved 
with  PKI  system.  It  is  important  to  perform  required  training  and 
awareness sessions with all people involved with PKI system.  
 
In addition to this needed technical capabilities are to be developed 
during this phase.  
 
The authors also recommend that during this phase all outputs from 
all phases are documented in detail. 
 
 

 

 
 

Claims made in this paper are to be verified through an appropriate 
prototype as future work. The scope of the prototype is to apply the 
proposed framework to a fully functional PKI system and measure its 
conformance  to the  Digital  Forensic  Readiness  Framework  for  PKI 
systems,  before  and  after  the  implementation.  More  future  work 
could  also  include  the  development  of  more  procedures  to  be 
included as guidelines for the framework implementation. 
 

REFERENCES 

[1]  Michael  Kohn,  JHP  Eloff  and  MS  Olivier  (2006);  ”Framework  for  a 

Digital Forensic Investigation”; In Proceedings of ISSA 2006. 
 

[2]  M Reith, C Carr, G Gunsch (2002); “An examination of digital forensic 

models”;  International Journal of Digital Evidence. 

 
[3]  B  Carrier  (2001);  “Defining  digital  forensic  examination  and  analysis 

tools”; Digital Research Workshop II. 

 
[4]  Tan,  J.  (2001);  ”Forensic  readiness”;  Technical.  Cambridge  USA: 

@stake, Inc. 

[5]  Yasinsac,  A.  and  Manzano,  Y.  (2001);  “Policies  to  Enhance  Computer 
and  Network  Forensics”;  Proceedings  of  the  2001  IEEE  Workshop  on 
Information Assurance and Security. 

[6]  Wolfe-Wilson,  J.  and  Wolfe,  H.B.  (2003);  “Management  strategies  for 
Information  Security 

forensic  security  measures”; 

implementing 
Technical Report Volume 8, Issue 2. 

[7]  R  Rowlingson  (2004);  “A  Ten  Step  Process  for  Forensic  Readiness”; 

International Journal of Digital Evidence.  

[8]  Carrier  B.  and  Spafford  E.  (2003);  “Getting  Physical  with  the  Digital 
Investigation Process”; International Journal of Digital Evidence Vol 2, 2. 
[9]  Mandia, Kevin, Prosise, Chris, and Pepe (2003); “Incident Response & 
Computer Forensics”; (Second Ed.) McGraw-Hill/Osborne, Emeryville. 
[10]  Nicole  Lang  Beebe,  Jan  Guynes  Clark  (2005);  ”A  Hierarchical, 
Objectives-Based  Framework  for  the  Digital  Investigations  Process”; 
Digital Investigation 2(2) 2005. 

[11]  Gary  Palmer  (2001);  “A  Road  Map  for  Digital  Forensic  Research”;  
Technical Report DTR-T001-01, DFRWS, November 2001; Report From 
the First Digital Forensic Research Workshop (DFRWS). 

[12]  Carrier  B.  and  Spafford  E.  (2005);  “An  Event-Based  Digital  Forensic 

Investigation Framework”; Digital Investigation 2(2) 2005. 

[13]  James  Michael  Stewart,  Ed  Tittel,  Mike  Chapple  (2008);  ”Certified 
Information Systems Security Professional Study Guide  Fourth Edition”; 
Wiley Publishing, Inc., Indianapolis, Indiana. 

[14]  W. Diffie, M. Hellman (1976); “New Directions in Cryptography”; IEEE 

Transactions on Information Theory, Vol. 22, No. 6. 

[15]  http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hardware_Security_Module. 
[16]  R. Housley, W. Ford, W. Polk, D. Solo (1999);  “Internet X.509 Public 

Key Infrastructure Certificate and CRL Profile”; The Internet Society. 

[17]  D. Cooper, S. Santesson, S. Farrell, S. Boeyen, R. Housley, W. Polk 

(2008);“Internet X.509 Public Key Infrastructure Certificate and 
Certificate Revocation List (CRL) Profile ”; The Internet Society. 

[18]   M. Toorani, A.A.B. Shirazi (2008); “LPKI- a Lightweight Public Key  

Infrastructure for the mobile environments”; Proceedings of the 11th IEEE 
International Conference on Communication Systems.

The following section focuses on discussing the proposed framework, 
by focusing on comparisons of our proposed framework to existing 
digital forensic investigation frameworks and models. 
 

IV.  DISCUSSION 

The  proposed  model  has  a  wider  scope  than  the  scope  of  digital 
forensic readiness, which previous models have proposed. The wider 
scope is due to differently defined aims and it is manifested through 
the  following  additional  phases  as  defined  in  our  model:  data-
analyses phase, post-incident phase, architecture defining phase and 
assessment phase. 
The phases in the proposed model are well defined in terms of scope 
and  functions.  The  proposed  procedures  and  guidelines  include  all 
matters  covered  in  previous  models  and  also  analyze  matters  that 
were  out  of  scope  of  previous  models,  such  as  post-incident 
collection,  post-incident  analyses  and  defining  architecture  of  the 
target information system (in this case the PKI system).   
 
Also,  it  is  to  be  noted  that  the  proposed  framework  gives  specific 
guidelines  and  proposed  procedures  relating 
to  PKI  systems 
specifically,  i.e.  interfacing  to  automatic  biometric  recognition 
systems  and  identity  management  systems,  and  collection  of  data 
from HSMs.  
 
In  addition,  the  framework  provides  recommendation  in  relation  to 
interfacing  with  automated  biometric  identification  systems  and 
identity  management 
give 
recommendations regarding modalities for access control.  The aim 
of this is to enable successful identification of physical individuals. 
This  identification  would  be  based  on  information  from  the  PKI 
system and systems that interface with the PKI system. This would 
ultimately  result  in  incorporating  digital  forensic  readiness  into  the 
PKI system. 

systems.  The 

authors 

also 

V.  CONCLUSION 

Let us revisit the problem statement: there exists no Digital Forensic 
Readiness  Framework  for  PKI  systems.  In  order  to  address  this 
problem,  the  authors  defined  aims  for  proposing  a  Digital  Forensic 
Readiness Framework for PKI systems. The aims have been defined 
based on previous work while the authors added one additional aim, 
which  was  not  identified  in  previous  work,  namely  the  aim  to 
preserve or improve the current level of information systems security 
of PKI systems. 
 
This  paper  has  defined  the  basic  postulates  of  a  Digital  Forensic 
Readiness Framework for PKI systems. Based on the defined aims, 
the authors proposed a framework. The frameworks core part is the 
DFR model for PKI systems. The authors also proposed procedures 
and gave a series of recommendations in regards of implementation 
of this model. 

 The proposed framework will enable researchers and practitioners to 
develop  PKI  system  solutions  which  would  have  digital  forensic 
readiness as a built-in feature, not simply as an add-on. 
 

 

 
 

