Towards a Framework for Enhancing Potential 

Digital Evidence Presentation 

 

 

1,2Nickson M. Karie 

1Department of Computer Science, University of Pretoria, 
Private Bag X20, Hatfield 0028, Pretoria, South Africa 
2Department of Computer Science, Kabarak University, 

Private Bag - 20157, Kabarak, Kenya 

Email: menza06@hotmail.com 

Abstract—In  the  case  of  digital  forensic  investigations,  the 
potential  digital  evidence  captured,  the  analysis,  interpretation, 
and  attribution  must  ultimately  be  presented  in  the  form  of 
expert  reports,  depositions,  and 
legal 
proceedings.  If  the  presentation  and  interpretation  of  the 
potential digital evidence is conducted correctly, it is much easier 
and  useful  in  apprehending  the  attacker  and  stands  a  much 
greater chance of being admissible in the event of a prosecution. 
Wrongly  presented  and  interpreted  potential  digital  evidence 
data  might  create  loopholes  for  perpetrators  to  exploit,  thus, 
making it hard to convict and prosecute them. 

testimony 

in  any 

Existing  digital  forensic  investigation  process  models  have 
provided  guidelines  for  identifying  and  preserving  potential 
digital  evidence  captured  from  a  crime  scene.  However,  the 
extent to which such potential digital evidence may be admissible 
in  a  court  of  law  remains  a  challenge  to  investigators.  This  is 
backed  up  by  the  fact  that  there  are  currently  no  standardised 
guidelines for even presenting the most common representations 
of  digital  forensic  evidence.  Therefore,  in  the  authors’  opinion, 
methodologies and specifications need to be developed in the field 
of  digital  forensics  with  the  ability  to  effectively  enhance  the 
potential digital evidence presentation and interpretation in any 
legal proceedings. 

In this paper, therefore, we present a step-by-step framework 
in an attempt to propose high-level guidelines for enhancing the 
potential  digital  evidence  presentation  in  any  legal  proceedings. 
Such a framework will be helpful to digital forensic experts, for 
example,  in  structuring  investigation  findings  as  well  as  in 
identifying relevant patterns of events to be incorporated during 
the presentation of potential digital evidence. The framework will 
also assist law enforcement agencies, for example, to determine, 
with  less  effort,  the  validity,  weight  and  admissibility  of  any 
potential digital evidence presented. However, it should be noted 
that  the  purpose  of  this  paper  is  not  to  replace  any  of  the 
extensive and known evidence presentation principles, but serves 
as  a  survey  of  the  state  of  the  art  of  the  research  area  while 
proposing  harmonised  and  high-level  guidelines  for  enhancing 
the presentation of potential digital evidence in legal proceedings. 
Keywords-digital forensics, evidence presentation, admissibility 
of  evidence,  legal  proceedings,  evidence  validation,  evidence 
weight, law enforcement agencies 

1H.S. Venter 

1Department of Computer Science,  

University of Pretoria, 

Private Bag X20, Hatfield 0028,  

Pretoria, South Africa. 

Email: hventer@cs.up.ac.za 

I. 

 INTRODUCTION 

and 

skills, 

including  methodologies 

The admissibility of potential digital evidence in any court 
of  law  is  nowadays  coming  under  increased  scrutiny  [1,  2]. 
Therefore,  to  convince  the  court  that  the  potential  digital 
evidence  presented  is  worthy  of  inclusion  into  the  criminal 
process, the digital forensic experts require extensive technical 
knowledge 
and 
specifications typically designed for potential digital evidence 
presentation  in  any  court  of  law.  This  also  implies  that,  the 
techniques,  knowledge  and  skills  used  by  the  digital  forensic 
experts  during  potential  digital  evidence  presentation,  should 
have  the  ability  to  convince  the  judges  on  the  validity, 
reliability  and  the  weight  of  the  potential  digital  evidence 
captured  during  the  investigation  process.  Moreover,  the 
methodologies  and  specifications  used  should  also  be  able  to 
assist the law enforcement agencies determine, with less effort, 
the admissibility of the potential digital evidence presented. 

In 

the  case  where 

the  crime  committed  calls  for 
prosecution, the interpretation, validation and evaluation of the 
weight of the potential digital evidence presented in the court 
may require confidence from the digital forensic experts about 
the inferences drawn from the potential digital evidence itself. 
This  implies  that  the  validation  and  evaluation  of  potential 
digital evidence might also require the verification of reliable 
sources  with  regards  to  where  the  evidence  was  created.  In 
addition, the digital forensic experts might be required to show 
how the evidence was processed and transported, including the 
evidence file itself, the application, the operating systems and 
the  hardware  platforms  [3]  used  during  the  investigation 
process. 

in 

legal  proceedings.  Furthermore, 

Therefore,  in  the  authors’  opinion,  methodologies  and 
specifications need to be developed in digital forensics with the 
ability to effectively enhance digital evidence presentation and 
interpretation 
the 
requirement of such methodologies and specifications in digital 
forensics is exceptionally important - both for the advancement 
of the field as well as for the effective use of tools, upon which 
the science of digital forensics and use in evaluation by courts 
depend 
law 
enforcement agencies, for example, in differentiating between 
experts’ own opinions from what the potential digital evidence 
really portrays. 

[4].  Such  methodologies  will  also  assist 

As for the remaining part of this paper, section II presents 
background  concepts  on  potential  digital  forensic  evidence 
presentation  while  section  III  considers  some  previous  and 
related  work.  A  detailed  explanation  of 
the  proposed 
framework  is  handled  in  section  IV  followed  a  critical 
evaluation of the framework in section V. Finally, conclusion 
and future work is given in section VI. 

II.  BACKGROUND 

Digital forensics (DF) is a new and growing field in both 
research  and  industry  [5].  Furthermore,  it  is  considered  a 
branch  of  forensic  science  dealing  with  the  recovery  and 
investigation  of  material  found  in  digital  devices,  often  in 
relation to digital crimes. According to Resendez et al [6], DF 
combines elements of law and computer science to collect and 
analyse  data  from  computer  systems,  networks,  wireless 
communications,  and  storage  devices  in  a  way  that  is 
admissible as evidence in a court of law. Being related to law 
and  technology,  DF,  therefore,  requires  more  discipline  than 
just  physical  forensic  techniques  [7].  Note  that,  physical 
forensic  techniques  involves  investigations  performed  by 
trained practitioners using tangible, physical items found on, in, 
or around a body at the crime scene.  The perception is that this 
domain  solely  supports  law  enforcement  and  the  courts  [8].  
Moreover, according to Newsom [9], physical forensic analysis 
can  be  controlled  in  the  laboratory  setting  and  can  progress 
logically,  incrementally,  and  in  concert  with  widely  accepted 
forensic  practices.  In  comparison,  DF  is  almost  entirely 
technology and market driven, generally outside the laboratory 
setting,  and  the  examinations  present  unique  variations  in 
almost every situation. [9]. 

investigators 

that 

involved  should, 

When considering the digital forensic investigation process, 
the  evidence  presentation  phase  is  arguably  one  of  the  most 
significant phases of the digital forensic investigation process 
[10].  The 
therefore,  be 
competent  and  proficient  in  all  the  investigation  processes 
used.  In  addition,  the  investigation  processes  should  be 
compatible  with  the  relevant  policies  and/or  laws  in  various 
jurisdictions.  This  also  means 
the  procedures  and 
techniques  used  in  digital  forensic  investigations  should  also 
allow  the  findings  to  be  admitted  to  a  court  of  law  [11]  or 
presented in any other legal proceedings. However, if evidence 
is  not  properly  or  legally  acquired  it  may  not  be  court 
admissible. 

After  an  investigation  process  has  been  conducted,  the 
results or findings are usually documented and presented to the 
authorities  or  to  any  legal  proceedings  as  potential  digital 
evidence. Such potential digital evidence data can then be used 
to support or refute a hypothesis that was formulated during the 
investigation process. This is a general notion of evidence and 
may  include  data  that  might  not  have  been  admissible 
previously  in  a  court  of  law,  particularly  in  a  case  where the 
evidence was not properly or legally acquired [11]. 

Although, most of the digital forensic investigation process 
models currently used have provided guidelines for identifying 
and  preserving  potential  digital  evidence  from  a  crime  scene 
[12],  in  the  authors’  opinion,  more  rigorous  and  flexible 
process  models  and  frameworks  need  to  be  developed.  This 

will  allow  for  efficient  investigation  and  further,  as  a  way 
towards easing, the presentation of potential digital evidence in 
any court of law. The absence of such models and frameworks 
in  digital  forensics,  for  example,  can  make  it  hard  for  law 
enforcement  agencies  to  identify  relevant  potential  digital 
evidence  to  support  or  refute  a  particular  court  case.  In 
addition, this absence can lead to different ways of presenting 
potential  digital  evidence  in  court,  thus,  leading  to  different 
interpretation and court outcomes [4]. In the next section, the 
authors  will  examine  existing  related  work  in  the  digital 
forensic domain. 

III.  RELATED WORK 

There  exists  several  research  works  in  digital  forensics 
from  different  researchers,  which  have  made  valuable 
contributions  towards  the  development  of  the  framework 
presented in this paper. In this section, therefore, a summary of 
some of the most prominent efforts in previous research work 
is provided. 

To  begin  with,  Boddington  et  al  [13]  argues  that  digital 
evidence  is  now  common  in  legal  cases.  However,  the 
understanding of the legal fraternity as to how far conventional 
ideas of evidence can be extended into the digital domain lags 
behind. There arises a need, therefore, for a practical ‘roadmap’ 
that  can  guide  the  legal  practitioner  in  identifying  potential 
digital  evidence  relevant  to  support  a  particular  case  and  in 
assessing its weight. Their paper goes further and describes a 
process  by  which  the  validation  of  relevant  potential  digital 
evidence required for legal argument can be facilitated, by an 
interrogative  approach  that  ensures  the  chain  of  reasoning  is 
sustained.  In  this  paper,  however,  we  focus  on  presenting  a 
step-by-step  framework  that  offers  a  simplified  platform  to 
help  digital  forensic  experts,  for  example,  in  structuring 
investigation findings as well as in identifying relevant patterns 
of  events  to  be  incorporated  during  the  presentation  of  the 
potential  digital  evidence  in  legal  proceedings.  Such  a 
framework  can  also  assist  law  enforcement  agencies,  for 
example, in reasoning and differentiating between experts’ own 
opinions  from  what  the  potential  digital  evidence  really 
portrays. 

In another paper by Sherman [14], he explains that digital 
forensic experts can discover significant and damning evidence 
that  can  potentially  convict  suspects  and  prosecute  them. 
However,  no  matter  how  momentous  the  evidence  or  how 
skillful  the  investigator  have  been  at  recovering  it,  if  the 
potential  digital  evidence  presentation  is  not  conducted  in  a 
coherent and understandable way to the court, the case may be 
lost.  Their  paper  then  elaborates  on  the  different  tools  and 
methods  to  assist  investigators  in  providing  comprehensible 
forensic  evidence  in  a  criminal  prosecution.  In  addition,  they 
explain how, by using such methods, investigators will have an 
increased likelihood of their gathered potential digital evidence 
being  accepted  and  understood.  However,  in  our  paper,  as 
mentioned earlier, we present the case for establishing a step-
by-step  framework  in  an  attempt  to  propose  guidelines  to 
enhance the process of presenting potential digital evidence in 
any legal proceedings. 

Another effort by Ćosić et al [15] highlights the problems 
encountered  by  investigators  in  the  pursuit  of  forensic 
investigations  of  digital  devices,  primarily  because  of 
misunderstanding  or  false  understanding  of  certain  important 
concepts.  Their  paper  then  proposes  an  ontology  of  digital 
evidence as one of possible methods suitable as a solution for 
this  problem.  However,  in  the  current  paper,  a  framework  is 
presented  in  an  attempt  to  propose  guidelines  to  enhance  the 
process of potential digital evidence presentation in any legal 
proceedings.  

More  efforts  by  Kuntze  et  al  [16]  explores  the  legal 
requirements  that  digital  evidence  must  meet  as  the  basis  for 
developing  technical  requirements  for  the  design  of  digital 
systems.  They  propose  an  approach  that  could  be  used  to 
develop digital devices and establish processes crafted for the 
purpose of creating digital evidence. They further suggest that 
the  legal  view  be  incorporated  into  digital  device  design  in 
order to allow for the probative value required of the potential 
digital evidence produced by such devices. However, this paper 
focuses on establishing a framework that provides guidelines to 
enhance  the  presentation  of  potential  digital  evidence  in  any 
court of law. 

Walker  [17],  in  his  paper,  explains  how  digital  forensics 
has  impacted  court  decision  and  rulings  regarding  computer 
records. He further elaborates on the cleanliness of the digital 
evidence  and  how  the  court  defines  “computer  records.” 
However,  in  this  paper,  we  proposed  a  framework  that  can 
assist law enforcement agencies, for example, in reasoning and 
identifying  evidence  relevant  to  support  or  refute  a  particular 
case presented in court. 

There  also  exist  other  related  works  on  issues  related  to 
digital evidence, but  neither those nor the cited references in 
this  paper  have  presented  a  step-by-step  framework  with 
guidelines  to  enhance  the  presentation  of  potential  digital 
evidence in legal proceedings in the way that is introduced in 
this paper. However, we acknowledge the fact that the previous 
research  works  have  offered  useful  insights  toward  the 
development of the framework in this paper. In the section that 
follows, we explain in more detail the proposed framework. 

IV.  THE PROPOSED FRAMEWORK FOR ENHANCING 

POTENTIAL DIGITAL EVIDENCE PRESENTATION  

In this section of the paper, the authors present a detailed 
explanation  of  the  proposed  framework.  Figure  1  shows  the 
structure of the framework. 

The framework consists of nine steps arranged from top to 
bottom  and  where  the  first  step  is  to  capture  the  potential 
digital  evidence  (unaltered  potential  digital  evidence  or 
exhibit). This is followed by identifying the source or origin of 
the potential digital evidence captured in the second step. Step 
three assesses and supplies proof and justification of the source 
or origin of the potential digital evidence captured.  

The fourth step establishes the validity and reliability of the 
source or origin of the captured potential digital evidence while 
step  five  is  used  to  establish  the  relationship  of  the  captured 
potential  digital  evidence  with 
the  crime  scene.  The 
relationship  between  the  captured  potential  digital  evidence 

with  other  available  evidence  is  introduced  in  step  six  while 
step  seven  identifies  and  clarifies  any  existing  claims  on  the 
captured potential digital evidence. The justifications of availed 
claims on the captured potential digital evidence are presented 
in step eight. Finally, concluding assertions on the validity of 
the captured potential digital evidence to the crime committed 
are supplied in step nine. 

in 

the  final  phase  of 

Note that we refer to ‘potential’ digital evidence throughout 
the  paper,  since  digital  artefacts  are  only  considered  to  be 
‘evidence’ 
the  digital  forensic 
investigation  process,  namely  the  reporting  phase.  This  also 
implies  that,  for  the  captured  potential  digital  evidence  to  be 
considered as competent digital evidence [18], it must possess 
scientific  validity  grounded 
in  scientific  methods  and 
procedures.  

In the subsections that follow, the steps 1 to 9 as presented 
in  the  proposed  framework  shown  in  Figure  1,  are  further 
explained in more detail. 

A.  Capture the potential digital evidence (unaltered potential 

digital evidence or exhibit)) 
In the case of a digital crime, there exist different types of 
potential digital evidence that can be captured and presented in 
a  court  of  law  or  any  legal  proceedings.  Furthermore,  the 
requirement  for  potential  evidence  presupposes  that  all  forms 
of  potential  digital  evidence  should  be  considered.  Such 
potential digital evidence may include, but are not limited to: 
log  files,  emails,  images,  video  clips,  electronic  documents, 
back-up  disks,  portable  computers,  network  traffic  records, 
personnel  records,  access  control  systems  and  telephone 
records.  However,  before  using  any  of  such  potential  digital 
evidence  to  determine  the  truth  of  an  issue,  the  investigator 
must  be  sure  that  such  potential  digital  evidence  has  been 
captured. 

Moreover, the admissibility of any of the captured potential 
digital  evidence  in  any  court  or  legal  proceedings  is  further 
subject to examination and verification through existing forms 
of  legal  argument.  However,  having  captured  the  potential 
digital  evidence  before  any  presentation  is  done  can  be  a 
confidence booster to the digital forensic expert, especially on 
the inferences drawn from such potential digital evidence. 

Although  it  is  beyond  the  scope  of  this  paper  to  further 
elaborate on the individual types of potential digital evidence 
that can be presented in court or any legal proceedings, future 
research  will  consider 
the  possibility  of  developing  a 
comprehensive  taxonomy  of  such  types  of  potential  digital 
evidence. 

B.  Identify the source or origin of the potential digital 

evidence 
It is important that investigators identify reliable sources or 
origin  of  each  of  the  different  types  of  potential  digital 
evidence captured before making a presentation in court. The 
potential digital evidence sources may exist in different forms, 
for example, it can exist in primary or secondary form. Primary 
sources are usually first-hand sources, for example photographs 
captured using a digital camera, e-mail or recorded speeches, 

while  secondary  sources  are  second-hand  sources  and  may 
include,  for  example,  information  distributed  freely  online  or 
information on printed materials. However, a secondary source 
may also be a primary source depending on how it is used [19]. 
This is backed up by the fact that, "Primary" and "secondary" 
are  relative  terms  and,  therefore,  sources  can  be  judged  as 
primary or secondary depending on their specific contexts and 
according to what they are used for [20].  

Therefore, the digital forensic experts should be well versed 
with the exact type of evidence at hand and the exact source or 
origin,  where  such  potential  digital  evidence  was  captured. 
Failure to identify the source of the potential digital evidence, 
for  example,  can  make  it  hard  for  such  potential  digital 
evidence to be considered for inclusion in the legal argument.  

Figure 1. The framework for enhancing potential digital evidence presentation 

C.  Assess and supply proof and justification of the source 

or origin of the potential digital evidence 
If  a  particular  type  of  potential  digital  evidence  (which 
becomes  a  court  exhibit)  is  considered for  inclusion  in  any 
legal argument, the proof and justification of its exact source 
or origin can be valuable. For example, the proof that there 
exist deleted emails in the victims’ mail inbox, for example, 
can  be  used  to  infer  the  view  that  there  was  an  attempt  to 
conceal potential evidence. Moreover, this can also be used 
to justify a belief or a hypothesis that was formulated during 
the investigation period. 

In  the  authors’  opinion,  however,  when  presenting  the 
proof and justification of the source or origin of the potential 
digital evidence captured, the digital forensic experts should 
also indicate whether doing so is absolutely essential to the 
law enforcement requirements.  

D.  Evaluate the validity and reliability of the source or 

origin of the potential digital evidence 
Evaluating  the  validity  and  reliability  of  the  source  or 
origin  of  the  potential  digital  evidence  captured,  calls  for 
criticism on the analysis and judgment of information source 
[21] in order to establish the admissibility of such potential 
digital evidence in court. It is possible that a given source of 
potential digital evidence can be viewed as more valid and/or 
reliable  than  another  depending  on  the  crime  committed. 
However,  any  valid  and  reliable  evidence  sources  must  be 
substantial  enough  to  support  refute  a  hypothesis  made 
during  the  investigation  process.  Therefore,  in  the  authors’ 
opinion,  the  evaluation  process  can  be  enhanced  by  using 
appropriate prompts as shown in step four of Figure 1. 

Such a prompt as introduced in step four of Figure 1 is 
meant to evaluate the validity and reliability of the potential 
digital  evidence  source  or  origin.  The  prompt  requires  a 
response of ‘Yes’ (if the potential digital evidence source or 
origin is considered valid and reliable), ‘No’ (if the potential 
digital evidence source or origin is invalid and unreliable) or 
‘Not Sure’, (suggesting a further search for clarification on 
the  validity  and  reliability  of  the  potential  digital  evidence 
source or origin). If the source is invalid and unreliable, the 
potential  digital  evidence  is  dismissed  and  the  process  is 
taken back to step one as shown in Figure 1 where another 
captured  exhibit  (unaltered  potential  digital  evidence)  is 
introduced.  Moreover,  if  the  investigator  is  not  sure  of  the 
validity and reliability of the source or origin then a further 
search  for  clarification  and/or  criticism  on  the  validity  and 
reliability is done and the process is taken back to step four 
of  Figure 1. 

Note  that  the  process  of  validating  and/or searching  for 
clarification  on  the  validity  and  reliability  of  the  potential 
digital  evidence  source  or  origin;  demand  the  use  of 
scientifically-proven methods. Such methods are beyond the 
scope of this paper; however, when used in digital forensics, 
they  must  be  based  on  empirical  and  measurable  evidence 
subject to specific scientific principles. 

E.  Establish the relationship between the potential digital 

evidence captured and the crime scene 
Establishing  the  relationship  of  the  potential  digital 
evidence with the scene of crime often reveals relationships 
(or links) between the captured potential digital evidence and 
the crime committed. For example, the presence of a printed 
e-mail  message  in  an  office  environment  can  be  linked  to 
using company resources to distributed unauthorized e-mail 
messages.  Therefore,  more  prompts  are  introduced  in  this 
step  (step  five)  to  determine  if  a  relationship  does  exist 
between  the  potential  digital  evidence  and  the  scene  of  the 
crime.  The  prompt  requires  a  response  of  ‘Yes’  (if  a 
relationship does exist between the potential digital evidence 
and the scene of crime), ‘No’ (if a relationship does not exist 
between  the  potential  digital  evidence  and  the  scene  of 
crime)  or  ‘Not  Sure’,  (suggesting  a  further  search  for 
clarification  and/or  criticism  on 
the  availability  of  a 
relationship  between  the  potential  digital  evidence  and  the 
scene of crime).  

If  a  relationship  does  not  exist  between  the  potential 
digital  evidence  and  the  scene  of  the  crime,  the  digital 
forensic expert then has to elaborate on why there exists no 
relationship.  For  example,  if  there  exist  traces  of  using  the 
company printer to print an e-mail  message and that the e-
mail message was found present in the inbox of the suspect, 
then  a  link  can  be  established  to  show  that  the  suspect  did 
print  the  message,  otherwise  not.  If  such  a  link  does  not 
exist, then the potential digital evidence is dismissed and the 
process  goes  back  to  step  one  where  a  new  exhibit  is 
introduced, as shown in Figure 1.  

F.  Establish the relationship between the potential digital 

evidence captured and other available evidence 
Step  six  of  Figure  1  is  meant  to  establish  relationships 
between any captured potential evidence with other available 
digital evidence. As with step four and five, step six also has 
a  prompt  to  determine  if  a  relationship  does  exist  between 
any  of  the  captured  potential  digital  evidence  with  other 
available  evidence.  The  prompt  also  requires  a  response  of 
‘Yes’  (if  a  relationship  does  exist  between  the  capture 
potential  digital  evidence  with  other  available  evidence), 
‘No’  (if  a  relationship  does  not  exist  between  the  captured 
potential  digital  evidence  and  other  available  evidence)  or 
‘Not  Sure’,  (suggesting  a  further  search  for  clarification 
and/or criticism on the availability of a relationship between 
the  captured  potential  digital  evidence  and  other  available 
evidence). 

Note  that,  for  steps  four,  five  and  six,  if  the  process 
continues  to  be  inconclusive,  for  example,  a  decision  to 
terminate  such  a  process  is  required.  The  digital  forensic 
expert, therefore, can decide whether to retain or dismiss the 
potential  digital  evidence  captured  during  the  investigation 
process. This, however, can be based on the weight, validity, 
reliability and the inferences drawn from the potential digital 
evidence itself. 

G.  Identify and clarify on any existing claims on the  

potential digital evidence 
In  step  seven,  it  is  possible  that  an  individual  (the 
suspect,  victim,  witness,  lawyer  etc.)  can  lay  a  claim  with 
respect  to  the  potential  digital  evidence  captured  and/or 
presented in court. For example, a suspect can claim that the 
potential  evidence  presented  did  not  originate  from  his 
computer. However, such a claim may primarily be used as a 
way  to  escape  criminal  guilt.  Early  identification  of  such 
claims by the digital forensic expert and further clarification 
on them, on the contrary, can improve court outcomes. This 
can also minimise or alleviate any discriminatory (unfair or 
the  existence  of 
prejudicial)  outcomes.  For  example, 
duplicate 
that 
pornographic images was illegal in the particular case) in the 
suspects’ computer and mobile phone can be used to clarify 
if  there was  transfer of  such  pictures from  the  computer to 
the  phone  or  vice  versa.  However,  this  may  require  solid 
investigation  findings  with  the  main  aim  being  to  refute  or 
support any such claims made. 

pornographic 

pictures 

(if 

assumed 

Moreover, investigators should also clarify whether, and 
if so, the extent to which (where necessary), the claims made 
and their interpretations have been misconstrued in any way. 

H.  Justify availed claims on the potential digital evidence 

If  any  individual  raises  a  claim  during  any  legal 
proceedings,  such  claim  can  either  be  supported  or 
dismissed.  However,  whether  supported  or  dismissed,  the 
digital  forensic  expert  has  to  justify  that  the  support  or 
dismissal of the claims was a fair one, i.e. that there were fair 
grounds for  the  support or  dismissal  of  the claims  and  that 
fair procedures were followed. This forms step eight of the 
proposed framework.   

In  the  case  of  supporting  an  existing  claim,  the  digital 
forensic  expert  might  be  required  to  further  show  that  the 
support  is  as  a  result  of  an  existing  relationship  (link) 
between  one  or  more  of  the  potential  digital  evidence 
artifacts  captured  during  the  investigation  process.  For 
example, the expert can support or refute the claim that the 
evidence did not originate from the suspect computer based 
on existing links to the crime committed. 

I.  Supply concluding assertions on the validity of the 

potential digital evidence captured to the crime 
committed 
Finally,  the  ninth  and  the  last  step  in  this  framework 
present  concluding  assertions  on  the  validity  and  reliability 
of  the  potential  digital  evidence  captured  and  presented  in 
relation  to  the  crime  committed.  This  may  also  include 
rendering  the  digital  evidence  invalid  and  unreliable  based 
on 
the 
inferences made from such potential digital evidence during 
the investigation and presentation process. For example, the 
existence of an internet connection, e.g. a modem or router, 
and  a  laptop  can  be  used  to  infer  the  fact  that  the  suspect 
used  these  devices  to  browse  pornographic  sites  and 
distributing unsolicited mails. 

the  estimated  weight,  validity,  reliability  and 

In  the  next  section  of  this  paper,  we  present  a  critical 

evaluation of our proposed framework. 

V.  CRITICAL EVALUATAION OF THE PROPOSED 

FRAMEWORK 

The  proposed  framework  in  this  paper  is  a  new 
contribution in the digital forensics domain. The scope of the 
framework  is  defined  by  the  steps  and  guidelines  of  the 
potential digital evidence presentation as seen Figure 1. The 
main steps as depicted in the framework include:  

Capture the potential digital evidence (unaltered 
potential digital evidence or exhibit) 
Identify the source or origin of the potential digital 
evidence 

  Assess and supply proof and justification of the 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

source or origin of the potential digital evidence 
Evaluate the validity and reliability of the source or 
origin of the potential digital evidence 
Establish the relationship between the potential 
digital evidence captured and the crime scene 
Establish the relationship between the potential 
digital evidence captured and other available 
evidence 
Identify and clarify on any existing claims on the  
potential digital evidence 
Justify availed claims on the potential digital 
evidence 
Supply concluding assertions on the validity of the 
potential digital evidence captured to the crime 
committed 

The specific details of the individual steps as identified in 
the  framework  have  further  been  explained  in  this  paper. 
However,  note  that  the  steps  as  identified  in  Figure  1  are 
meant to facilitate this study and primarily focus on potential 
digital  evidence  presentation  in  legal  proceedings.  Such 
proposed  steps  or  guidelines  are  by  no  means  the  final 
guaranteed steps to potential digital evidence admissibility in 
court.  In  the  authors’  opinion,  however,  organising  the 
framework  into  steps  (high-level  guidelines)  was  necessary 
to simplify the understanding of the framework as well as to 
present specific finer details of the framework. 

The proposed framework in this paper can be used in the 
digital forensics domain, for example, to help investigators in 
structuring  investigation  findings  as  well  as  in  identifying 
relevant  patterns  of  events  to  be  incorporated  during  the 
presentation and interpretation of potential digital evidence. 
Moreover,  the  framework  can  also  be  helpful  to  law 
enforcement agencies and other stakeholders, for example, in 
reasoning and identifying potential digital evidence relevant 
to  support  or  refute  a  particular  criminal  case  presented  in 
court. 

For  the  case  of  digital  evidence  admissibility  in  legal 
proceedings, the steps as identified in the framework can be 
used,  for  example,  to  evaluate  the  validity,  reliability  and 
weight  of  the  potential  digital  evidence  presented  in  court. 
Such  steps  will  also  ensure  that  investigators  conduct  the 

digital  forensic  investigation  process  thoroughly  before 
doing  a  final  presentation  of  potential  digital  evidence.  In 
addition,  the  framework  can  also  be  used  for  training 
investigators,  especially  on  the  art  of  presenting  potential 
digital evidence in court. 

Academic institutions should also find the framework in 
this paper constructive, especially when training students on 
how  to  present  digital  forensic  evidence  in  any  legal 
proceedings. Moreover, such a framework can also be used 
when  developing  curriculums  and  education  materials  for 
different  programs  of  study  within  the  field  of  digital 
forensics.  Such  programs  will,  for  example,  ensure  that 
institutions produce well-enabled digital forensic specialists 
(investigators) capable of properly handling the presentation 
of potential digital evidence in legal proceedings.  

Developers  of  digital  forensics  tools  can  also  use  the 
proposed  framework  to  develop  automated  potential  digital 
evidence  presentation  and  interpretations  tools.  This  also 
implies  that  developers  might  find  the  framework  in  this 
paper  useful,  especially  when  considering  the  development 
of  new  digital  forensic  tools  and  techniques  for  addressing 
potential  digital  evidence  presentation  and  interpretation 
including  potential  digital  evidence  visualisation  in  legal 
proceedings. 

Finally, the framework presented in this paper has been 
designed  in  such  a  way  as  to  accommodate  new  steps  that 
may emerge as a result of jurisdictional legal requirements or 
domain  evolution.  To  the  best  of  the  authors'  knowledge, 
there  exists  no  other  work  of  this  kind  in  the  domain  of 
digital  forensics.  Therefore,  this  is  a  novel  contribution 
towards advancing the digital forensics research domain. 

VI.  CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 

The problem addressed in this paper was that of the lack 
of  methodologies  and  specifications  typically  designed  to 
enhance  potential  digital  evidence  presentation  and 
interpretation in a court of law. This is backed up by the fact 

REFERENCES 

[1]  Arnold,  E.,  and  Soriano,  E.,  (2013).The  Recent  Evolution  of  Expert 
Evidence in Selected Common Law Jurisdictions Around the World. A 
commissioned  study  for  the  Canadian  Institute  of  Chartered  Business 
Valuators. 

[2]  Roberts, J.L, and Suits, C., (2013). Admissibility of digital image data: 
at: 

concerns 
http://libraries.maine.edu/Spatial/gisweb/spatdb/acsm95/ac95071.html 
[Accessed April 10, 2013]. 

courtroom. 

Available 

in 

the 

[3]  Boddington,  R.,  Hobbs,  V.,  and  Mann,  G.,  (2008).Validating  Digital 
Evidence for Legal Argument . In the Proceedings of the 6th Australian 
Digital  Forensics  Conference,  Edith  Cowan  University,  Perth  Western 
Australia. 

[4]  Cohen, F., (2011). Digital Forensic Evidence Examination, 3RD Edition. 

Published by fred cohen & Associates.  ISBN # 1-878109-46-4. 

[5]  Hoss,  A.M.  and  Corver,  D.L.,  (2009).  Weaving  Ontologies  to  Support 

Digital Forensic Analysis.  ISI 2009,  Richardson, TX, USA. 

[6]  Resendez, I., Martinez, P., and Abraham, J., (2012). An introduction to 
digital 
at: 
http://acetweb.org/journal/ACETJournal_Vol6/An%20Introduction%20t
o%20Digital%20Forensics.pdf [Accessed 04 September 2012]. 

Available 

forensics. 

to  provide  guidelines  for  enhancing 

that  there  are  currently  no  standardised  guidelines  for  even 
presenting  the  most  common  representations  of  potential 
digital forensic evidence. A framework was then proposed in 
an  attempt 
the 
presentation  and  interpretation  of  potential  digital  evidence 
in  any  legal  proceedings.  The  requirement  of  such  a 
framework in digital forensics is exceptionally important to 
any digital forensic expert, especially during potential digital 
evidence presentation. With such a framework, investigators 
will, for example, be able to structure investigation findings 
as  well  as  identify  relevant  patterns  of  events  to  be 
incorporated  during  the  presentation  and  interpretation  of 
potential digital evidence in court. Moreover, the framework 
can  also  help  law  enforcement  agencies,  for  example,  to 
differentiate between experts’ own opinions and from what 
the  potential  digital  evidence  really  portrays.  The  ability  to 
differentiate  opinions  from  the  real  evidence  presented  in 
court  can  assist  the  jury  in  evaluating  opinions  that 
substantially outweighs prejudicial effect. 

Finally,  the  authors  believe  that  by  using  such  a 
framework, better presentation and interpretation of potential 
digital  evidence  in  any  legal  proceedings  can  be  attained. 
However,  more  research  needs  to  be  conducted  in  order  to 
improve  on  the  proposed  framework  in  this  paper.  The 
framework  should  also  spark  further  discussion  on  the 
development  of  new  techniques  to  support  potential  digital 
evidence presentation and interpretation in any court of law. 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 

This work is based on the research supported in part by the 
National  Research  Foundation  of  South  Africa  (Grant 
specific unique reference number (UID) 85794). The Grant 
holder acknowledges that opinions, findings and conclusion 
or recommendations expressed in any publication generated 
by NRF supported research are that of the author(s), and that 
the NRF accepts no liability whatsoever in this regard. 

 

[7]  Khatir,  M.;  Hejazi,  S.M.;  Sneiders,  E.,  (2008).  Two-Dimensional 
Evidence Reliability Amplification Process Model for Digital Forensics. 
Digital  Forensics  and  Incident  Analysis,  2008.  WDFIA  '08.  Third 
International  Annual  Workshop  on  Digital  Forensics  and  Incident 
Analysis. pp.21-29. 

[8]  Palmer, G., (2002). Forensic Analysis in the Digital World. International 

Journal of Digital Evidence, Vol. 1, No. 1 

[9]  Newsom,  P.D.,  (2006).  Computer  Forensics  –  Overcoming  the  “after-
the-fact” 
at: 
http://d0mber.wordpress.com/tag/cloud-security/  [Accessed  April  11, 
2013]. 

approach. 

Available 

[10]  Yusoff,  Y.,  Ismail,  R.  and  Hassan,  Z.,  (2011).  Common  Phases  of 
Computer  Forensics  Investigation  Models.  International  Journal  of 
Computer Science & Information Technology (IJCSIT), Vol. 3, No. 3. 

[11]  Carrier, B.D., (2006). Digital Investigation and Digital Forensic Basics. 
Available  at:  http://www.digital-evidence.org/di_basics.html  [Accessed 
March 28, 2013]. 

[12]  Valjarevic,  A.,  and  Venter,  H.S.,  (2012).  Harmonised  Digital  Forensic 
Investigation  Process  Model.  In  the  Proceedings  of  the  Information 
Security for South Africa (ISSA) . pp.1-10. 

[13]  Boddington,  R.,  Hobbs,  V.,  and  Mann,  G.,  (2008).  Validating  digital 
evidence  for  legal  argument.  In  the  Proceedings  of  the  6th  Australian 
Digital  Forensics  Conference,  Edith  Cowan  University,  Perth  Western 
Australia. 

[14]  Sherman,  S.,  (2006).  A  digital  forensic  practitioner’s  guide  to  giving 
evidence  in  a  court  of  law.  In  the  Proceedings  of  the  4th  Australian 
Digital  Forensics  Conference,  Edith  Cowan  University,  Perth  Western 
Australia. 

[15]  Ćosić, J. and Ćosić, Z.  (2012). The Necessity of Developing a Digital 
Evidence  Ontology.  In  the  proceedings  of  the  Central  European 
Conference  on  Information  and  Intelligent  Systems.  pp.  325-330, 
Varaždin, Croatia. 

[16]  Kuntze. N., Rudolph, C., Alva, A., Popovsky, B.E., Christiansen, J., and 
Kemmerich, T., (2012).  On The Creation Of Reliable Digital Evidence. 
Available 
at: 
http://sit.sit.fraunhofer.de/smv/publications/download/IFIPFor2012.pdf 
[Accessed March 28, 2013]. 

[17]  Walker,  C.,  (2006).  Computer  Forensics:  Bringing  the  Evidence  to 
at: 

Available 

Court. 

 

http://www.infosecwriters.com/text_resources/pdf/Computer_Forensics_
to_Court.pdf [Accessed March 28, 2013]. 

[18]  Ryan,  D.J.,  and  Shpantzer,  G.,  (2005).  Legal  Aspects  of  Digital 
Forensics.  Available  at:  http://euro.ecom.cmu.edu/program/law/08-
732/Evidence/RyanShpantzer.pdf [Accessed April 1, 2013]. 

[19]  Ithaca  College  Library,  (2013).  Primary  and  secondary  sources. 
http://www.ithacalibrary.com/sp/subjects/primary 

at: 

Available 
[Accessed April 1, 2013]. 

[20]  Helge,  K.,  (1989).  An  Introduction  to  the  Historiography  of  Science. 

Cambridge University Press. p. 121. ISBN 0-521-38921-6. 

[21]  Pierce,  R.,  (2007).  Evaluating  Information:  Validity,  Reliability, 
at: 

Accuracy, 
Available 
http://www.sagepub.com/upm-data/17810_5052_Pierce_Ch07.pdf 
[Accessed 

Triangulation. 

79-99. 

2013].

pp. 

April 

1, 

